To Float or Not to Float: How Interactions between Light and Dissolved Inorganic Carbon Species Determine the Buoyancy of Stratiotes aloides

Structural diversity formed by dense, floating Stratiotes aloides stands, generates hotspots of
biodiversity of flora and fauna in wetlands. However, only part of the populations become emergent
and provide this important facilitation. Since it has been hypothesised that its buoyancy depends on
the rates of underwater photosynthesis, we investigated the role of dissolved CO2 availability and
PAR on photosynthesis, biomass production and buoyancy in a controlled greenhouse experiment.
Photosynthesis and growth were strongly influenced by both PAR and CO2 availability. At low PAR,
plants formed less biomass and produced no emergent leaves, even when CO2 was abundant. At low CO2
levels, S. aloides switched to HCO3- use, resulting in a lower photosynthetic O2 production,
decreased emergent leaf formation and increased CaCO3 precipitation on its leaves, all of which
impaired buoyancy. At high PAR, low CO2 availability resulted in slower colonisation of the water
layer, whereas CO2 availability did not influence PAR-limited plants. Our study shows that site
conditions, rather than the sole abundance of potentially facilitating species, may strongly
determine whether or not they form the structure necessary to act as a facilitator for biodiversity
in aquatic environments.



Phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidation in the chemocline of a ferruginous meromictic lake

Precambrian Banded Iron Formation (BIF) deposition was conventionally attributed to the
precipitation of iron-oxides resulting from the abiotic reaction of ferrous iron (Fe(II)) with
photosynthetically produced oxygen. Earliest traces of oxygen date from 2.7 Ga, thus raising
questions as to what may have caused BIF precipitation before oxygenic photosynthesis evolved. The
discovery of anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria thriving through the oxidation of Fe(II) has provided
support for a biological origin for some BIFs, but despite reports suggesting that anoxygenic
phototrophs may oxidize Fe(II) in the environment, a model ecosystem of an ancient ocean where they
are demonstrably active was lacking. Here we show that anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria contribute
to Fe(II) oxidation in the water column of the ferruginous sulfate-poor, meromictic lake La Cruz
(Spain). We observed in-situ photoferrotrophic activity through stimulation of phototrophic carbon
uptake in the presence of Fe(II), and determined light-dependent Fe(II)-oxidation by the natural
chemocline microbiota. Moreover, a photoferrotrophic bacterium most closely related to Chlorobium
ferrooxidans was enriched from the ferruginous water column. Our study for the first time
demonstrates a direct link between anoxygenic photoferrotrophy and the anoxic precipitation of
Fe(III)-oxides in a ferruginous water column, providing a plausible mechanism for the bacterial
origin of BIFs before the advent of free oxygen. However, photoferrotrophs represent only a minor
fraction of the anoxygenic phototrophic community with the majority apparently thriving by sulfur
cycling, despite the very low sulfur content in the ferruginous chemocline of Lake La Cruz.



Cold-acclimation limits low temperature induced photoinhibition by promoting a higher photochemical quantum yield and a more effective PSII restoration in darkness in the Antarctic rather than the Andean ecotype of Colobanthus quitensis Kunt Bartl (Cariophyllaceae)

Background Ecotypes of Colobanthus quitensis Kunt Bartl (Cariophyllaceae) from Andes Mountains and
Maritime Antarctic grow under contrasting photoinhibitory conditions, reaching differential cold
tolerance upon cold acclimation. Photoinhibition depends on the extent of photodamage and recovery
capability. We propose that cold acclimation increases resistance to low-temperature-induced
photoinhibition, limiting photodamage and promoting recovery under cold. Therefore, the Antarctic
ecotype (cold hardiest) should be less photoinhibited and have better recovery from low-temperature-
induced photoinhibition than the Andean ecotype. Both ecotypes were exposed to cold induced
photoinhibitory treatment (PhT). Photoinhibition and recovery of photosystem II (PSII) was followed
by fluorescence, CO2 exchange, and immunoblotting analyses. Results The same reduction (25%) in
maximum PSII efficiency (Fv/Fm) was observed in both cold-acclimated (CA) and non-acclimated (NA)
plants under PhT. A full recovery was observed in CA plants of both ecotypes under dark conditions,
but CA Antarctic plants recover faster than the Andean ecotype. Under PhT, CA plants maintain their
quantum yield of PSII, while NA plants reduced it strongly (50% and 73% for Andean and Antarctic
plants respectively). Cold acclimation induced the maintenance of PsaA and Cyt b6/f and reduced a
41% the excitation pressure in Antarctic plants, exhibiting the lowest level under PhT. xCold
acclimation decreased significantly NPQs in both ecotypes, and reduced chlorophylls and D1
degradation in Andean plants under PhT. NA and CA plants were able to fully restore their normal
photosynthesis, while CA Antarctic plants reached 50% higher photosynthetic rates after recovery,
which was associated to electron fluxes maintenance under photoinhibitory conditions. Conclusions
Cold acclimation has a greater importance on the recovery process than on limiting photodamage. Cold
acclimation determined the kinetic and extent of recovery process under darkness in both C.
quitensis ecotypes. The greater recovery of PSII at low temperature in the Antarctic ecotype was
related with its ability to maintain PsaA, Cyt b6/f and D1 protein after photoinhibitory conditions.
This is probably due to either a higher stability of these polypeptides or to the maintenance of
their turnover upon cold acclimation. In both cases, it is associated to the maintenance of electron
drainage from the intersystem pool, which maintains QA more oxidized and may allow the synthesis of
ATP and NADPH necessaries for the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate in the Calvin Cycle.
This could be a key factor for C. quitensis success under the harsh conditions and the short growing
period in the Maritime Antarctic.



Phenotypic differences determine drought stress responses in ecotypes of Arundo donax adapted to different environments.

Arundo donax has been identified as an important biomass and biofuel crop. Yet, there has been
little research on photosynthetic and metabolic traits, which sustain the high productivity of A.
donax under drought conditions. This study determined phenotypic differences between two A. donax
ecotypes coming from stands with contrasting adaptation to dry climate. We hypothesized that the
Bulgarian (BG) ecotype, adapted to drier conditions, exhibits greater drought tolerance than the
Italian (IT) ecotype, adapted to a more mesic environment. Under well-watered conditions the BG
ecotype was characterized by higher photosynthesis, mesophyll conductance, intrinsic water use
efficiency, PSII efficiency, isoprene emission rate and carotenoids, whereas the IT ecotype showed
higher levels of hydroxycinnamates. Photosynthesis of water-stressed plants was mainly limited by
diffusional resistance to CO2 in BG, and by biochemistry in IT. Recovery of photosynthesis was more
rapid and complete in BG than in IT, which may indicate better stability of the photosynthetic
apparatus associated to enhanced induction of volatile and non-volatile isoprenoids and
phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. This study shows that a large phenotypic plasticity among A. donax
ecotypes exists, and may be exploited to compensate for the low genetic variability of this species
when selecting plant productivity in constrained environments.



Current Status and Future Prospects for the Assessment of Marine and Coastal Ecosystem Services: A Systematic Review

Background Research on ecosystem services has grown exponentially during the last decade. Most of
the studies have focused on assessing and mapping terrestrial ecosystem services highlighting a
knowledge gap on marine and coastal ecosystem services (MCES) and an urgent need to assess them.
Methodology/Principal Findings We reviewed and summarized existing scientific literature related to
MCES with the aim of extracting and classifying indicators used to assess and map them. We found 145
papers that specifically assessed marine and coastal ecosystem services from which we extracted 476
indicators. Food provision, in particular fisheries, was the most extensively analyzed MCES while
water purification and coastal protection were the most frequently studied regulating and
maintenance services. Also recreation and tourism under the cultural services was relatively well
assessed. We highlight knowledge gaps regarding the availability of indicators that measure the
capacity, flow or benefit derived from each ecosystem service. The majority of the case studies was
found in mangroves and coastal wetlands and was mainly concentrated in Europe and North America. Our
systematic review highlighted the need of an improved ecosystem service classification for marine
and coastal systems, which is herein proposed with definitions and links to previous
classifications. Conclusions/Significance This review summarizes the state of available information
related to ecosystem services associated with marine and coastal ecosystems. The cataloging of MCES
indicators and the integrated classification of MCES provided in this paper establish a background
that can facilitate the planning and integration of future assessments. The final goal is to
establish a consistent structure and populate it with information able to support the implementation
of biodiversity conservation policies.



