Forest restoration, biodiversity and ecosystem functioning

Globally, forests cover nearly one third of the land area and they contain over 80% of terrestrial
biodiversity. Both the extent and quality of forest habitat continue to decrease and the associated
loss of biodiversity jeopardizes forest ecosystem functioning and the ability of forests to provide
ecosystem services. In the light of the increasing population pressure, it is of major importance
not only to conserve, but also to restore forest ecosystems. Ecological restoration has recently
started to adopt insights from the biodiversity-ecosystem functioning (BEF) perspective. Central is
the focus on restoring the relation between biodiversity and ecosystem functioning. Here we provide
an overview of important considerations related to forest restoration that can be inferred from this
BEF-perspective. Restoring multiple forest functions requires multiple species. It is highly
unlikely that species-poor plantations, which may be optimal for above-ground biomass production,
will outperform species diverse assemblages for a combination of functions, including overall carbon
storage and control over water and nutrient flows. Restoring stable forest functions also requires
multiple species. In particular in the light of global climatic change scenarios, which predict more
frequent extreme disturbances and climatic events, it is important to incorporate insights from the
relation between biodiversity and stability of ecosystem functioning into forest restoration
projects. Rather than focussing on species per se, focussing on functional diversity of tree species
assemblages seems appropriate when selecting tree species for restoration. Finally, also plant
genetic diversity and above - below-ground linkages should be considered during the restoration
process, as these likely have prominent but until now poorly understood effects at the level of the
ecosystem. The BEF-approach provides a useful framework to evaluate forest restoration in an
ecosystem functioning context, but it also highlights that much remains to be understood, especially
regarding the relation between forest functioning on the one side and genetic diversity and above-
ground-below-ground species associations on the other. The strong emphasis of the BEF-approach on
functional rather than taxonomic diversity may also be the beginning of a paradigm shift in
restoration ecology, increasing the tolerance towards allochthonous species.



Pervasive Defaunation of Forest Remnants in a Tropical Biodiversity Hotspot

Tropical deforestation and forest fragmentation are among the most important biodiversity
conservation issues worldwide, yet local extinctions of millions of animal and plant populations
stranded in unprotected forest remnants remain poorly explained. Here, we report unprecedented rates
of local extinctions of medium to large-bodied mammals in one of the world's most important tropical
biodiversity hotspots. We scrutinized 8,846 person-years of local knowledge to derive patch
occupancy data for 18 mammal species within 196 forest patches across a 252,669-km2 study region of
the Brazilian Atlantic Forest. We uncovered a staggering rate of local extinctions in the mammal
fauna, with only 767 from a possible 3,528 populations still persisting. On average, forest patches
retained 3.9 out of 18 potential species occupancies, and geographic ranges had contracted to
0–14.4% of their former distributions, including five large-bodied species that had been extirpated
at a regional scale. Forest fragments were highly accessible to hunters and exposed to edge effects
and fires, thereby severely diminishing the predictive power of species-area relationships, with the
power model explaining only ∼9% of the variation in species richness per patch. Hence, conventional
species-area curves provided over-optimistic estimates of species persistence in that most forest
fragments had lost species at a much faster rate than predicted by habitat loss alone.



Can retention forestry help conserve biodiversity? A meta-analysis

 Industrial forestry typically leads to a simplified forest structure and altered species
composition. Retention of trees at harvest was introduced about 25 years ago to mitigate negative
impacts on biodiversity, mainly from clearcutting, and is now widely practiced in boreal and
temperate regions. Despite numerous studies on response of flora and fauna to retention, no
comprehensive review has summarized its effects on biodiversity in comparison to clearcuts as well
as un-harvested forests.   Using a systematic review protocol, we completed a meta-analysis of 78
studies including 944 comparisons of biodiversity between retention cuts and either clearcuts or un-
harvested forests, with the main objective of assessing whether retention forestry helps, at least
in the short term, to moderate the negative effects of clearcutting on flora and fauna.   Retention
cuts supported higher richness and a greater abundance of forest species than clearcuts as well as
higher richness and abundance of open-habitat species than un-harvested forests. For all species
taken together (i.e. forest species, open-habitat species, generalist species and unclassified
species), richness was higher in retention cuts than in clearcuts.   Retention cuts had negative
impacts on some species compared to un-harvested forest, indicating that certain forest-interior
species may not survive in retention cuts. Similarly, retention cuts were less suitable for some
open-habitat species compared with clearcuts.   Positive effects of retention cuts on richness of
forest species increased with proportion of retained trees and time since harvest, but there were
not enough data to analyse possible threshold effects, that is, levels at which effects on
biodiversity diminish. Spatial arrangement of the trees (aggregated vs. dispersed) had no effect on
either forest species or open-habitat species, although limited data may have hindered our capacity
to identify responses. Results for different comparisons were largely consistent among taxonomic
groups for forest and open-habitat species, respectively.   Synthesis and applications. Our meta-
analysis provides support for wider use of retention forestry since it moderates negative harvesting
impacts on biodiversity. Hence, it is a promising approach for integrating biodiversity conservation
and production forestry, although identifying optimal solutions between these two goals may need
further attention. Nevertheless, retention forestry will not substitute for conservation actions
targeting certain highly specialized species associated with forest-interior or open-habitat
conditions.    Our meta-analysis provides support for wider use of retention forestry since it
moderates negative harvesting impacts on biodiversity. Hence, it is a promising approach for
integrating biodiversity conservation and production forestry, although identifying optimal
solutions between these two goals may need further attention. Nevertheless, retention forestry will
not substitute for conservation actions targeting certain highly specialized species associated with
forest-interior or open-habitat conditions.



A global model of the response of tropical and sub-tropical forest biodiversity to anthropogenic pressures

Habitat loss and degradation, driven largely by agricultural expansion and intensification, present
the greatest immediate threat to biodiversity. Tropical forests harbour among the highest levels of
terrestrial species diversity and are likely to experience rapid land-use change in the coming
decades. Synthetic analyses of observed responses of species are useful for quantifying how land use
affects biodiversity and for predicting outcomes under land-use scenarios. Previous applications of
this approach have typically focused on individual taxonomic groups, analysing the average response
of the whole community to changes in land use. Here, we incorporate quantitative remotely sensed
data about habitats in, to our knowledge, the first worldwide synthetic analysis of how individual
species in four major taxonomic groups—invertebrates, ‘herptiles’ (reptiles and amphibians), mammals
and birds—respond to multiple human pressures in tropical and sub-tropical forests. We show
significant independent impacts of land use, human vegetation offtake, forest cover and human
population density on both occurrence and abundance of species, highlighting the value of analysing
multiple explanatory variables simultaneously. Responses differ among the four groups considered,
and—within birds and mammals—between habitat specialists and habitat generalists and between narrow-
ranged and wide-ranged species.



Forest Loss and the Biodiversity Threshold: An Evaluation Considering Species Habitat Requirements and the Use of Matrix Habitats

Habitat loss is the main driver of the current biodiversity crisis, a landscape-scale process that
affects the survival of spatially-structured populations. Although it is well-established that
species responses to habitat loss can be abrupt, the existence of a biodiversity threshold is still
the cause of much controversy in the literature and would require that most species respond
similarly to the loss of native vegetation. Here we test the existence of a biodiversity threshold,
i.e. an abrupt decline in species richness, with habitat loss. We draw on a spatially-replicated
dataset on Atlantic forest small mammals, consisting of 16 sampling sites divided between forests
and matrix habitats in each of five 3600-ha landscapes (varying from 5% to 45% forest cover), and on
an a priori classification of species into habitat requirement categories (forest specialists,
habitat generalists and open-area specialists). Forest specialists declined abruptly below 30% of
forest cover, and spillover to the matrix occurred only in more forested landscapes. Generalists
responded positively to landscape heterogeneity, peaking at intermediary levels of forest cover.
Open area specialists dominated the matrix and did not spillover to forests. As a result of these
distinct responses, we observed a biodiversity threshold for the small mammal community below 30%
forest cover, and a peak in species richness just above this threshold. Our results highlight that
cross habitat spillover may be asymmetrical and contingent on landscape context, occurring mainly
from forests to the matrix and only in more forested landscapes. Moreover, they indicate the
potential for biodiversity thresholds in human-modified landscapes, and the importance of landscape
heterogeneity to biodiversity. Since forest loss affected not only the conservation value of forest
patches, but also the potential for biodiversity-mediated services in anthropogenic habitats, our
work indicates the importance of proactive measures to avoid human-modified landscapes to cross this
threshold.



