Arsenic Metabolism by Human Gut Microbiota upon in Vitro Digestion of Contaminated Soils

Background Speciation analysis is essential when evaluating risks from arsenic (As) exposure. In an
oral exposure scenario, the importance of presystemic metabolism by gut microorganisms has been
evidenced with in vivo animal models and in vitro experiments with animal microbiota. However, it is
unclear whether human microbiota display similar As metabolism, especially when present in a
contaminated matrix. Objectives We evaluated the metabolic potency of in vitro cultured human colon
microbiota toward inorganic As (iAs) and As-contaminated soils. Methods A colon microbial community
was cultured in a dynamic model of the human gut. These colon microbiota were incubated with iAs and
with As-contaminated urban soils. We determined As speciation analysis using high-performance liquid
chromatography coupled with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Results We found a high
degree of methylation for colon digests both of iAs (10 μg methylarsenical/g biomass/hr) and of As-
contaminated soils (up to 28 μg/g biomass/hr). Besides the formation of monomethylarsonic acid
(MMAV), we detected the highly toxic monomethylarsonous acid (MMAIII). Moreover, this is the first
description of microbial thiolation leading to monomethylmonothioarsonic acid (MMMTAV). MMMTAV, the
toxicokinetic properties of which are not well known, was in many cases a major metabolite.
Conclusions Presystemic As metabolism is a significant process in the human body. Toxicokinetic
studies aiming to completely elucidate the As metabolic pathway would therefore benefit from
incorporating the metabolic potency of human gut microbiota. This will result in more accurate risk
characterization associated with As exposures.



Liming impacts on soils, crops and biodiversity in the UK: A review.

Fertile soil is fundamental to our ability to achieve food security, but problems with soil
degradation (such as acidification) are exacerbated by poor management. Consequently, there is a
need to better understand management approaches that deliver multiple ecosystem services from
agricultural land. There is global interest in sustainable soil management including the re-
evaluation of existing management practices. Liming is a long established practice to ameliorate
acidic soils and many liming-induced changes are well understood. For instance, short-term liming
impacts are detected on soil biota and in soil biological processes (such as in N cycling where
liming can increase N availability for plant uptake). The impacts of liming on soil carbon storage
are variable and strongly relate to soil type, land use, climate and multiple management factors.
Liming influences all elements in soils and as such there are numerous simultaneous changes to soil
processes which in turn affect the plant nutrient uptake; two examples of positive impact for crops
are increased P availability and decreased uptake of toxic heavy metals. Soil physical conditions
are at least maintained or improved by liming, but the time taken to detect change varies
significantly. Arable crops differ in their sensitivity to soil pH and for most crops there is a
positive yield response. Liming also introduces implications for the development of different crop
diseases and liming management is adjusted according to crop type within a given rotation. Repeated
lime applications tend to improve grassland biomass production, although grassland response is
variable and indirect as it relates to changes in nutrient availability. Other indicators of liming
response in grassland are detected in mineral content and herbage quality which have implications
for livestock-based production systems. Ecological studies have shown positive impacts of liming on
biodiversity; such as increased earthworm abundance that provides habitat for wading birds in upland
grasslands. Finally, understanding of liming impacts on soil and crop processes are explored
together with functional aspects (in terms of ecosystems services) in a new qualitative framework
that includes consideration of how liming impacts change with time. This holistic approach provides
insights into the far-reaching impacts that liming has on ecosystems and the potential for liming to
enhance the multiple benefits from agriculturally managed land. Recommendations are given for future
research on the impact of liming and the implications for ecosystem services.



Microbiota Characterization of Compost Using Omics Approaches Opens New Perspectives for Phytophthora Root Rot Control.

Phytophthora root rot caused by Phytophthora nicotianae is an economically important disease in
pepper crops. The use of suppressive composts is a low environmental impact method for its control.
Although attempts have been made to reveal the relationship between microbiota and compost
suppressiveness, little is known about the microorganisms associated with disease suppression. Here,
an Ion Torrent platform was used to assess the microbial composition of composts made of different
agro-industrial waste and with different levels of suppressiveness against P. nicotianae. Both
bacterial and fungal populations responded differently depending on the chemical heterogeneity of
materials used during the composting process. High proportions (67-75%) of vineyard pruning waste
were used in the most suppressive composts, COM-A and COM-B. This material may have promoted the
presence of higher relative abundance of Ascomycota as well as higher microbial activity, which have
proved to be essential for controlling the disease. Although no unique fungi or bacteria have been
detected in neither suppressive nor conducive composts, relatively high abundance of Fusarium and
Zopfiella were found in compost COM-B and COM-A, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first work that studies compost metabolome. Surprisingly, composts and peat clustered together
in principal component analysis of the metabolic data according to their levels of suppressiveness
achieved. This study demonstrated the need for combining the information provided by different
techniques, including metagenomics and metametabolomics, to better understand the ability of compost
to control plant diseases.



General Relationships between Abiotic Soil Properties and Soil Biota across Spatial Scales and Different Land-Use Types

Very few principles have been unraveled that explain the relationship between soil properties and
soil biota across large spatial scales and different land-use types. Here, we seek these general
relationships using data from 52 differently managed grassland and forest soils in three study
regions spanning a latitudinal gradient in Germany. We hypothesize that, after extraction of
variation that is explained by location and land-use type, soil properties still explain significant
proportions of variation in the abundance and diversity of soil biota. If the relationships between
predictors and soil organisms were analyzed individually for each predictor group, soil properties
explained the highest amount of variation in soil biota abundance and diversity, followed by land-
use type and sampling location. After extraction of variation that originated from location or land-
use, abiotic soil properties explained significant amounts of variation in fungal, meso- and
macrofauna, but not in yeast or bacterial biomass or diversity. Nitrate or nitrogen concentration
and fungal biomass were positively related, but nitrate concentration was negatively related to the
abundances of Collembola and mites and to the myriapod species richness across a range of forest and
grassland soils. The species richness of earthworms was positively correlated with clay content of
soils independent of sample location and land-use type. Our study indicates that after accounting
for heterogeneity resulting from large scale differences among sampling locations and land-use
types, soil properties still explain significant proportions of variation in fungal and soil fauna
abundance or diversity. However, soil biota was also related to processes that act at larger spatial
scales and bacteria or soil yeasts only showed weak relationships to soil properties. We therefore
argue that more general relationships between soil properties and soil biota can only be derived
from future studies that consider larger spatial scales and different land-use types.



[Biodegradation of tri- and perchloroethylene in sewage waters and soils by a microbial consortium of compost and phototrophic bacteria].

Compost and phototrophic bacteria are found to be able to degrade trichloroethylene (TCE) and
perchloroethylene (PCE). With a TCE dose increase by more than 10 mg/kg, the TCE degradation
decreases due to the toxic effect of this pollutant on microbial consortium activity. The addition
of compost combined with a liquid culture of phototrophic bacteria (PTB) is experimentally proved to
effectively decrease the TCE content in soil and water.



