Neutral theory and the species abundance distribution: recent developments and prospects for unifying niche and neutral perspectives

Published in 2001, The Unified Neutral Theory of Biodiversity and Biogeography (UNTB) emphasizes the
importance of stochastic processes in ecological community structure, and has challenged the
traditional niche-based view of ecology. While neutral models have since been applied to a broad
range of ecological and macroecological phenomena, the majority of research relating to neutral
theory has focused exclusively on the species abundance distribution (SAD). Here, we synthesize the
large body of work on neutral theory in the context of the species abundance distribution, with a
particular focus on integrating ideas from neutral theory with traditional niche theory. First, we
summarize the basic tenets of neutral theory; both in general and in the context of SADs. Second, we
explore the issues associated with neutral theory and the SAD, such as complications with fitting
and model comparison, the underlying assumptions of neutral models, and the difficultly of linking
pattern to process. Third, we highlight the advances in understanding of SADs that have resulted
from neutral theory and models. Finally, we focus consideration on recent developments aimed at
unifying neutral- and niche-based approaches to ecology, with a particular emphasis on what this
means for SAD theory, embracing, for instance, ideas of emergent neutrality and stochastic niche
theory. We put forward the argument that the prospect of the unification of niche and neutral
perspectives represents one of the most promising future avenues of neutral theory research.



The effects of weather on fungal abundance and richness among 25 communities in the Intermountain West

Background Because moisture and temperature influence the growth of fungi, characterizing weather
conditions favorable for fungi may be used to predict the abundance and richness of fungi in
habitats with different climate conditions. To estimate habitat favorability to fungi, we examined
the relationship of fungal abundance and species richness to various weather and environmental
parameters in the Intermountain West. We cultured fungi from air and leaf surfaces, and collected
continuous temperature and relative humidity measures over the growing season at 25 sites. Results
Fungal richness was positively correlated with fungal abundance (r = 0.75). Measures of moisture
availability, such as relative humidity and vapor pressure deficit, explained more of the variance
in fungal abundance and richness than did temperature. Climate measurements from nearby weather
stations were good predictors of fungal abundance and richness but not as good as weather
measurements obtained in the field. Weather variables that took into account the proportion of time
habitats experienced favorable or unfavorable relative humidity and temperatures were the best
predictors, explaining up to 56% of the variation in fungal abundance and 72% for fungal richness.
Conclusion Our results suggest that the abundance and richness of fungi in a habitat is limited by
the duration of unfavorable weather conditions. Because fungal pathogens likely have similar abiotic
requirements for growth as other fungi, characterizing weather conditions favorable for fungi also
may be used to predict the selective pressures imposed by pathogenic fungi on plants in different
habitats.



Identifying the candidate genes involved in the calyx abscission process of 'Kuerlexiangli’ (Pyrus sinkiangensis Yu) by digital transcript abundance measurements

Background 'Kuerlexiangli’ (Pyrus sinkiangensis Yu), a native pear of Xinjiang, China, is an
important agricultural fruit and primary export to the international market. However, fruit with
persistent calyxes affect fruit shape and quality. Although several studies have looked into the
physiological aspects of the calyx abscission process, the underlying molecular mechanisms remain
unknown. In order to better understand the molecular basis of the process of calyx abscission,
materials at three critical stages of regulation, with 6000 × Flusilazole plus 300 × PBO treatment
(calyx abscising treatment) and 50 mg.L-1GA3 treatment (calyx persisting treatment), were collected
and cDNA fragments were sequenced using digital transcript abundance measurements to identify
candidate genes. Results Digital transcript abundance measurements was performed using high-
throughput Illumina GAII sequencing on seven samples that were collected at three important stages
of the calyx abscission process with chemical agent treatments promoting calyx abscission and
persistence. Altogether more than 251,123,845 high quality reads were obtained with approximately
8.0 M raw data for each library. The values of 69.85%-71.90% of clean data in the digital transcript
abundance measurements could be mapped to the pear genome database. There were 12,054 differentially
expressed genes having Gene Ontology (GO) terms and associating with 251 Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG) defined pathways. The differentially expressed genes correlated with calyx
abscission were mainly involved in photosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction, cell wall
modification, transcriptional regulation, and carbohydrate metabolism. Furthermore, candidate calyx
abscission-specific genes, e.g. Inflorescence deficient in abscission gene, were identified.
Quantitative real-time PCR was used to confirm the digital transcript abundance measurements
results. Conclusions We identified candidate genes that showed highly dynamic changes in expression
during the calyx abscission process. These genes are potential targets for future functional
characterization and should be valuable for exploration of the mechanisms of calyx abscission, and
eventually for developing methods based on small molecule application to induce calyx abscission in
fruit production. Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1186/1471-2164-14-727) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized
users.



Quantification of fungal abundance on cultural heritage using real time PCR targeting the β-actin gene

The traditional methodology used for the identification of microbes colonizing our cultural heritage
was the application of cultivation methods and/or microscopy. This approach has many advantages, as
living microorganisms may be obtained for physiological investigations. In addition, these
techniques allow the quantitative and qualitative assessment of the investigated environment.
Quantitative analyses are done by plate count and the determination of abundance by the colony
forming unit (CFU). Nevertheless, these techniques have many drawbacks that lead to an
underestimation of the cell numbers and do not provide a comprehensive overview of the composition
of the inhabiting microbiota. In the last decades, several molecular techniques have been developed
enabling many advantages over the cultivation approach. Mainly PCR-based, fingerprinting techniques
allow a qualitative detection and identification of the microbiota. In this study, we developed a
real time PCR method as a simple, rapid and reliable tool to detect and quantify fungal abundance
using the β-actin gene, which is known to appear as a single-copy gene in fungi. To this end, five
different indoor thermal insulation materials applied for historical buildings that were previously
tested for their bio-susceptibility against various fungi were subjected to qPCR analyses. The
obtained results were compared with those obtained from a previous study investigating the bio-
susceptibility of the insulation materials using classical cultivation experiments. Both results
correlated well, revealing that Perlite plaster was the most suitable insulation material, showing
the lowest fungal CFU and qPCR values. In contrast, insulations made of wood showed to be not
recommendable from the microbiological point of view. In addition, the potential of qPCR was tested
in other materials of cultural heritage, as old parchments, showing to be a suitable method for
measuring fungal abundance in these delicate materials.



Spatio-temporal analysis of abundances of three malaria vector species in southern Benin using zero-truncated models

Background A better understanding of the ecology and spatial-temporal distribution of malaria
vectors is essential to design more effective and sustainable strategies for malaria control and
elimination. In a previous study, we analyzed presence-absence data of An. funestus, An. coluzzii,
and An. gambiae s.s. in an area of southern Benin with high coverage of vector control measures.
Here, we further extend the work by analysing the positive values of the dataset to assess the
determinants of the abundance of these three vectors and to produce predictive maps of vector
abundance. Methods Positive counts of the three vectors were assessed using negative-binomial zero-
truncated (NBZT) mixed-effect models according to vector control measures and environmental
covariates derived from field and remote sensing data. After 8-fold cross-validation of the models,
predictive maps of abundance of the sympatric An. funestus, An. coluzzii, and An. gambiae s.s. were
produced. Results Cross-validation of the NBZT models showed a satisfactory predictive accuracy.
Almost all changes in abundance between two surveys in the same village were well predicted by the
models but abundances for An. gambiae s.s. were slightly underestimated. During the dry season,
predictive maps showed that abundance greater than 1 bite per person per night were observed only
for An. funestus and An. coluzzii. During the rainy season, we observed both increase and decrease
in abundance of An. funestus, which are dependent on the ecological setting. Abundances of both An.
coluzzii and An. gambiae s.s. increased during the rainy season but not in the same areas.
Conclusions Our models helped characterize the ecological preferences of three major African malaria
vectors. This works highlighted the importance to study independently the binomial and the zero-
truncated count processes when evaluating vector control strategies. The study of the bio-ecology of
malaria vector species in time and space is critical for the implementation of timely and efficient
vector control strategies.



