A general linear model-based approach for inferring selection to climate

Background Many efforts have been made to detect signatures of positive selection in the human
genome, especially those associated with expansion from Africa and subsequent colonization of all
other continents. However, most approaches have not directly probed the relationship between the
environment and patterns of variation among humans. We have designed a method to identify regions of
the genome under selection based on Mantel tests conducted within a general linear model framework,
which we call MAntel-GLM to Infer Clinal Selection (MAGICS). MAGICS explicitly incorporates
population-specific and genome-wide patterns of background variation as well as information from
environmental values to provide an improved picture of selection and its underlying causes in human
populations. Results Our results significantly overlap with those obtained by other published
methodologies, but MAGICS has several advantages. These include improvements that: limit false
positives by reducing the number of independent tests conducted and by correcting for geographic
distance, which we found to be a major contributor to selection signals; yield absolute rather than
relative estimates of significance; identify specific geographic regions linked most strongly to
particular signals of selection; and detect recent balancing as well as directional selection.
Conclusions We find evidence of selection associated with climate (P < 10-5) in 354 genes, and among
these observe a highly significant enrichment for directional positive selection. Two of our
strongest 'hits’, however, ADRA2A and ADRA2C, implicated in vasoconstriction in response to cold and
pain stimuli, show evidence of balancing selection. Our results clearly demonstrate evidence of
climate-related signals of directional and balancing selection.



Insect-induced tree mortality of boreal forests in eastern Canada under a changing climate

Forest insects are major disturbances that induce tree mortality in eastern coniferous (or fir-
spruce) forests in eastern North America. The spruce budworm (SBW) (Choristoneura fumiferana
[Clemens]) is the most devastating insect causing tree mortality. However, the relative importance
of insect-caused mortality versus tree mortality caused by other agents and how this relationship
will change with climate change is not known. Based on permanent sample plots across eastern Canada,
we combined a logistic model with a negative model to estimate tree mortality. The results showed
that tree mortality increased mainly due to forest insects. The mean difference in annual tree
mortality between plots disturbed by insects and those without insect disturbance was 0.0680 per
year (P < 0.0001, T-test), and the carbon sink loss was about 2.87t C ha−1 year−1 larger than in
natural forests. We also found that annual tree mortality increased significantly with the annual
climate moisture index (CMI) and decreased significantly with annual minimum temperature (Tmin),
annual mean temperature (Tmean) and the number of degree days below 0°C (DD0), which was
inconsistent with previous studies (Adams et al. 2009; van Mantgem et al. 2009; Allen et al. 2010).
Furthermore, the results for the trends in the magnitude of forest insect outbreaks were consistent
with those of climate factors for annual tree mortality. Our results demonstrate that forest insects
are the dominant cause of the tree mortality in eastern Canada but that tree mortality induced by
insect outbreaks will decrease in eastern Canada under warming climate.



Association of Seasonal Climate Variability and Age-Specific Mortality in Northern Sweden before the Onset of Industrialization

Background and aims: Little is known about health impacts of climate in pre-industrial societies. We
used historical data to investigate the association of temperature and precipitation with total and
age-specific mortality in Skellefteå, northern Sweden, between 1749 and 1859. Methods: We retrieved
digitized aggregated population data of the Skellefteå parish, and monthly temperature and
precipitation measures. A generalized linear model was established for year to year variability in
deaths by annual and seasonal average temperature and cumulative precipitation using a negative
binomial function, accounting for long-term trends in population size. The final full model included
temperature and precipitation of all four seasons simultaneously. Relative risks (RR) with 95%
confidence intervals (CI) were calculated for total, sex- and age-specific mortality. Results: In
the full model, only autumn precipitation proved statistically significant (RR 1.02; CI 1.00–1.03,
per 1cm increase of autumn precipitation), while winter temperature (RR 0.98; CI 0.95–1.00, per 1 °C
increase in temperature) and spring precipitation (RR 0.98; CI 0.97–1.00 per 1 cm increase in
precipitation) approached significance. Similar effects were observed for men and women. The impact
of climate variability on mortality was strongest in children aged 3–9, and partly also in older
children. Infants, on the other hand, appeared to be less affected by unfavourable climate
conditions. Conclusions: In this pre-industrial rural region in northern Sweden, higher levels of
rain during the autumn increased the annual number of deaths. Harvest quality might be one critical
factor in the causal pathway, affecting nutritional status and susceptibility to infectious
diseases. Autumn rain probably also contributed to the spread of air-borne diseases in crowded
living conditions. Children beyond infancy appeared most vulnerable to climate impacts.



Raised temperatures over the Kericho tea estates: revisiting the climate in the East African highlands malaria debate

Background Whether or not observed increases in malaria incidence in the Kenyan Highlands during the
last thirty years are associated with co-varying changes in local temperature, possibly connected to
global changes in climate, has been debated for over a decade. Studies, using differing data sets
and methodologies, produced conflicting results regarding the occurrence of temperature trends and
their likelihood of being responsible, at least in part, for the increases in malaria incidence in
the highlands of western Kenya. A time series of quality controlled daily temperature and rainfall
data from Kericho, in the Kenyan Highlands, may help resolve the controversy. If significant
temperature trends over the last three decades have occurred then climate should be included (along
with other factors such as land use change and drug resistance) as a potential driver of the
observed increases in malaria in the region. Methods Over 30 years (1 January 1979 to 31 December
2009) of quality controlled daily observations ( > 97% complete) of maximum, minimum and mean
temperature were used in the analysis of trends at Kericho meteorological station, sited in a tea
growing area of Kenya's western highlands. Inhomogeneities in all the time series were identified
and corrected. Linear trends were identified via a least-squares regression analysis with
statistical significance assessed using a two-tailed t-test. These 'gold standard' meteorological
observations were compared with spatially interpolated temperature datasets that have been developed
for regional or global applications. The relationship of local climate processes with larger climate
variations, including tropical sea surface temperatures (SST), and El Niño-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) was also assessed. Results An upward trend of ≈0.2°C/decade was observed in all three
temperature variables (P < 0.01). Mean temperature variations in Kericho were associated with large-
scale climate variations including tropical SST (r = 0.50; p < 0.01). Local rainfall was found to
have inverse effects on minimum and maximum temperature. Three versions of a spatially interpolated
temperature data set showed markedly different trends when compared with each other and with the
Kericho station observations. Conclusion This study presents evidence of a warming trend in observed
maximum, minimum and mean temperatures at Kericho during the period 1979 to 2009 using gold standard
meteorological observations. Although local factors may be contributing to these trends, the
findings are consistent with variability and trends that have occurred in correlated global climate
processes. Climate should therefore not be dismissed as a potential driver of observed increases in
malaria seen in the region during recent decades, however its relative importance compared to other
factors needs further elaboration. Climate services, pertinent to the achievement of development
targets such as the Millennium Development Goals and the analysis of infectious disease in the
context of climate variability and change are being developed and should increase the availability
of relevant quality controlled climate data for improving development decisions. The malaria
community should seize this opportunity to make their needs heard.



Climate and landscape drivers of tree decline in a Mediterranean ecoregion

Climate change and anthropogenic land use are increasingly affecting the resilience of natural
ecosystems. In Mediterranean ecoregions, forests and woodlands have shown progressive declines in
health. This study focuses on the decline of an endemic woodland tree species, Eucalyptus wandoo
(wandoo), occurring in the biodiversity hotspot of southwest Western Australia. We determined the
change in health of wandoo stands between 2002 and 2008 across its geographic and climatic range,
and associated this change in health with non-biotic variables focusing on: (1) fragment metrics;
(2) topography; (3) soil characteristics; and (4) climate. Only fragment metrics and climate
variables were found to be significantly related to the observed change in health. Stands that were
small with high perimeter/area ratios were found to be most sensitive to health declines. Recent
increases in autumn temperatures and decreases in annual rainfall were negatively affecting health
of wandoo most prominently in the low rainfall zone of its climatic range. Together, these results
suggest the onset of range contraction for this ecologically important species, which is likely to
be exacerbated by projected future changes in climate. Our results emphasize the importance of
establishing monitoring programs to identify changes in health and decline trends early to inform
management strategies, particularly in the sensitive Mediterranean ecoregions.



