High-purity Cu nanocrystal synthesis by a dynamic decomposition method

Cu nanocrystals are applied extensively in several fields, particularly in the microelectron,
sensor, and catalysis. The catalytic behavior of Cu nanocrystals depends mainly on the structure and
particle size. In this work, formation of high-purity Cu nanocrystals is studied using a common
chemical vapor deposition precursor of cupric tartrate. This process is investigated through a
combined experimental and computational approach. The decomposition kinetics is researched via
differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis using Flynn-Wall-Ozawa, Kissinger,
and Starink methods. The growth was found to be influenced by the factors of reaction temperature,
protective gas, and time. And microstructural and thermal characterizations were performed by X-ray
diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and differential
scanning calorimetry. Decomposition of cupric tartrate at different temperatures was simulated by
density functional theory calculations under the generalized gradient approximation. High
crystalline Cu nanocrystals without floccules were obtained from thermal decomposition of cupric
tartrate at 271°C for 8 h under Ar. This general approach paves a way to controllable synthesis of
Cu nanocrystals with high purity.



Alignment-free local structural search by writhe decomposition

Motivation: Rapid methods for protein structure search enable biological discoveries based on
flexibly defined structural similarity, unleashing the power of the ever greater number of solved
protein structures. Projection methods show promise for the development of fast structural database
search solutions. Projection methods map a structure to a point in a high-dimensional space and
compare two structures by measuring distance between their projected points. These methods offer a
tremendous increase in speed over residue-level structural alignment methods. However, current
projection methods are not practical, partly because they are unable to identify local similarities.
Results: We propose a new projection-based approach that can rapidly detect global as well as local
structural similarities. Local structural search is enabled by a topology-inspired writhe
decomposition protocol that produces a small number of fragments while ensuring that similar
structures are cut in a similar manner. In benchmark tests, we show that our method, writher,
improves accuracy over existing projection methods in terms of recognizing scop domains out of
multi-domain proteins, while maintaining accuracy comparable with existing projection methods in a
standard single-domain benchmark test. Availability: The source code is available at the following
website: http://compbio.berkeley.edu/proj/writher/ Contact: dzhi@compbio.berkeley.edu Supplementary
information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.



Radiolytic decomposition of pesticide carbendazim in waters and wastes for environmental protection

The radiolytic degradation of widely used fungicide, carbendazim, in synthetic aqueous solutions and
industrial wastewater was investigated employing γ-irradiation. The effect of the absorbed dose,
initial concentration and pH of irradiated solution on the effectiveness of carbendazim
decomposition were investigated. Decomposition of carbendazim in 100 μM concentration in synthetic
aqueous solutions required irradiation with 600 Gy dose. The aqueous solutions of carbendazim have
been irradiated in different conditions, where particular active radical species from water
radiolysis predominate. The obtained data have been compared with the kinetic modeling. The
reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography was used for the determination of carbendazim
and its radiolytic decomposition products in irradiated solutions. The changes of toxicity of
irradiated solutions were examined with different test organisms and human leukemia cells.



HIV AWARENESS IN CHINA AMONG WOMEN OF REPRODUCTIVE AGE (1997–2005): A DECOMPOSITION ANALYSIS

Summary HIV prevalence in China is less than one per cent, but the absolute number of people living
with HIV/AIDS is large and growing. Given the limited scope of any potential cure for HIV,
prevention plays a crucial role in controlling the epidemic. This paper examines the evolution of
HIV awareness among women in China between 1997 and 2005. A regression decomposition analysis
technique was used to disentangle the two main components driving a change in HIV awareness. The
results show that HIV awareness has increased over time in China. The gaps between groups are
narrowing over time and lower HIV awareness groups are catching up with the higher awareness groups.
In 2005 education remained one of the main factors associated with HIV awareness, the other main
factors being ethnicity, exposure to TV and newspapers. The increases in HIV awareness observed
between 1997 and 2001 are similar between groups of women with different demographic
characteristics, whereas between 2003 and 2005 increases are more pronounced among specific groups
of women such as women from rural areas, women from Western parts of the country, women who belong
to ethnic minorities and those with no education or with only primary education. The results suggest
that the main driver of the observed change in HIV awareness over time in China is change in the
environment such as in political commitment, interventions and campaigns rather than change in
population structure.



Decomposition and Mineralization of Dimethyl Phthalate in an Aqueous Solution by Wet Oxidation

Dimethyl phthalate (DMP) was treated via wet oxygen oxidation process (WOP). The decomposition
efficiency ηDMP of DMP and mineralization efficiency ηTOC of total organic carbons were measured to
evaluate the effects of operation parameters on the performance of WOP. The results revealed that
reaction temperature T is the most affecting factor, with a higher T offering higher ηDMP and ηTOC
as expected. The ηDMP increases as rotating speed increases from 300 to 500 rpm with stirring
enhancement of gas liquid mass transfer. However, it exhibits reduction effect at 700 rpm due to
purging of dissolved oxygen by overstirring. Regarding the effects of pressure PT, a higher PT
provides more oxygen for the forward reaction with DMP, while overhigh PT increases the absorption
of gaseous products such as CO2 and decomposes short-chain hydrocarbon fragments back into the
solution thus hindering the forward reaction. For the tested PT of 2.41 to 3.45 MPa, the results
indicated that 2.41 MPa is appropriate. A longer reaction time of course gives better performance.
At 500 rpm, 483 K, 2.41 MPa, and 180 min, the ηDMP and ηTOC are 93 and 36%, respectively.



