Urban Ecosystem Health Assessment: Perspectives and Chinese Practice

The concept of ecosystem health is a way to assess the holistic operations and development potential
of urban ecosystems. Accelerated by the practical need for integrated ecosystem management,
assessment of urban ecosystem health has been greatly developed and extensively applied in urban
planning and management. Development is aimed at comprehensively evaluating the performance of urban
ecosystems, identifying the limiting factors, and providing suggestions for urban regulation. The
time has come for reviewing and establishing an instructional framework for urban ecosystem health
assessment to shed light on certain essential issues of urban ecosystem health. Based on literature
reviews and series of practice, a holistic framework of urban ecosystem health assessment is
proposed. The framework covers the essential elements of urban ecosystem health and integrates three
dimensions: theoretical foundation, assessment method, and practical application. Concrete
assessment methods are also established, focusing on both external performance and internal
metabolic processes. The practice of urban ecosystem health assessment in China is illustrated to
briefly demonstrate the application of the established framework and methods. Some prospects are
discussed for urban ecosystem health assessment and its application in urban planning and
management.



Environmental Impacts of the Use of Ecosystem Services: Case Study of Birdwatching

The main reason for promoting the concept of ecosystem services lies in its potential to contribute
to environmental conservation. Highlighting the benefits derived from ecosystems fosters an
understanding of humans’ dependence on nature, as users of ecosystem services. However, the act of
using ecosystem services may not be environmentally neutral. As with the use of products and
services generated within an economy, the use of ecosystem services may lead to unintended
environmental consequences throughout the ‘ecosystem services supply chain.’ This article puts
forward a framework for analyzing environmental impacts related to the use of ecosystem services,
indicating five categories of impact: (1) direct impacts (directly limiting the service’s future
availability); and four categories of indirect impacts, i.e., on broader ecosystem structures and
processes, which can ultimately also affect the initial service: (2) impacts related to managing
ecosystems to maximize the delivery of selected services (affecting ecosystems’ capacity to provide
other services); (3) impacts associated with accessing ecosystems to use their services (affecting
other ecosystem components); (4) additional consumption of products, infrastructure or services
required to use a selected ecosystem service, and their life-cycle environmental impacts; and (5)
broader impacts on the society as a whole (environmental awareness of ecosystem service users and
other stakeholders). To test the usefulness of this framework, the article uses the case study of
birdwatching, which demonstrates all of the above categories of impacts. The article justifies the
need for a broader consideration of environmental impacts related to the use of ecosystem services.



Marine ecosystem health status assessment through integrative biomarker indices: a comparative study after the Prestige oil spill “Mussel Watch”

Five integrative biomarker indices are compared: Bioeffects Assessment Index (BAI), Health Status
Index (HSI), integrated biological response (IBR), ecosystem health condition chart (EHCC) and
Integrative Biomarker Index (IBI). They were calculated on the basis of selected biomarker data
collected in the framework of the Prestige oil spill (POS) Mussel Watch monitoring (2003–2006)
carried out in Galicia and the Bay of Biscay. According to the BAI, the health status of mussels was
severely affected by POS and signals of recovery were evidenced in Galicia after April-04 and in
Biscay Bay after April-05. The HSI (computed by an expert system) revealed high levels of
environmental stress in 2003 and a recovery trend from April-04 to April-05. In July-05, the health
status of mussels worsened but in October-05 and April-06 healthy condition was again recorded in
almost all localities. IBR/n and IBI indicated that mussel health was severely affected in 2003 and
improved from 2004 onwards. EHCC reflected a deleterious environmental condition in 2003 and a
recovery trend after April-04, although a healthy ecosystem condition was not achieved in April-06
yet. Whereas BAI and HSI provide a basic indication of the ecosystem health status, star plots
accompanying IBR/n and IBI provide complementary information concerning the mechanisms of biological
response to environmental insult. Overall, although the integrative indices based on biomarkers show
different sensitivity, resolution and informative output, all of them provide coherent information,
useful to simplify the interpretation of biological effects of pollution in marine pollution
monitoring. Each others’ advantages, disadvantages and applicability for ecosystem health assessment
are discussed.



Ecosystem service provision in a changing Europe: adapting to the impacts of combined climate and socio-economic change

Context Future patterns of European ecosystem services provision are likely to vary significantly as
a result of climatic and socio-economic change and the implementation of adaptation strategies.
However, there is little research in mapping future ecosystem services and no integrated assessment
approach to map the combined impacts of these drivers. Objective Map changing patterns in ecosystem
services for different European futures and (a) identify the role of driving forces; (b) explore the
potential influence of different adaptation options. Methods The CLIMSAVE integrated assessment
platform is used to map spatial patterns in services (food, water and timber provision, atmospheric
regulation, biodiversity existence/bequest, landscape experience and land use diversity) for a
number of combined climatic and socio-economic scenarios. Eight adaptation strategies are explored
within each scenario. Results Future service provision (particularly water provision) will be
significantly impacted by climate change. Socio-economic changes shift patterns of service
provision: more dystopian societies focus on food provision at the expense of other services.
Adaptation options offer significant opportunities, but may necessitate trade-offs between services,
particularly between agriculture- and forestry-related services. Unavoidable trade-offs between
regions (particularly South–North) are also identified in some scenarios. Conclusions Coordinating
adaptation across regions and sectors will be essential to ensure that all needs are met: a factor
that will become increasingly pressing under dystopian futures where inter-regional cooperation
breaks down. Integrated assessment enables exploration of interactions and trade-offs between
ecosystem services, highlighting the importance of taking account of complex cross-sectoral
interactions under different future scenarios of planning adaptation responses.



Trait-based approaches for understanding microbial biodiversity and ecosystem functioning

In ecology, biodiversity-ecosystem functioning (BEF) research has seen a shift in perspective from
taxonomy to function in the last two decades, with successful application of trait-based approaches.
This shift offers opportunities for a deeper mechanistic understanding of the role of biodiversity
in maintaining multiple ecosystem processes and services. In this paper, we highlight studies that
have focused on BEF of microbial communities with an emphasis on integrating trait-based approaches
to microbial ecology. In doing so, we explore some of the inherent challenges and opportunities of
understanding BEF using microbial systems. For example, microbial biologists characterize
communities using gene phylogenies that are often unable to resolve functional traits. Additionally,
experimental designs of existing microbial BEF studies are often inadequate to unravel BEF
relationships. We argue that combining eco-physiological studies with contemporary molecular tools
in a trait-based framework can reinforce our ability to link microbial diversity to ecosystem
processes. We conclude that such trait-based approaches are a promising framework to increase the
understanding of microbial BEF relationships and thus generating systematic principles in microbial
ecology and more generally ecology.



