Immense Essence of Excellence: Marine Microbial Bioactive Compounds

Oceans have borne most of the biological activities on our planet. A number of biologically active
compounds with varying degrees of action, such as anti-tumor, anti-cancer, anti-microtubule, anti-
proliferative, cytotoxic, photo protective, as well as antibiotic and antifouling properties, have
been isolated to date from marine sources. The marine environment also represents a largely
unexplored source for isolation of new microbes (bacteria, fungi, actinomycetes, microalgae-
cyanobacteria and diatoms) that are potent producers of bioactive secondary metabolites. Extensive
research has been done to unveil the bioactive potential of marine microbes (free living and
symbiotic) and the results are amazingly diverse and productive. Some of these bioactive secondary
metabolites of microbial origin with strong antibacterial and antifungal activities are being
intensely used as antibiotics and may be effective against infectious diseases such as HIV,
conditions of multiple bacterial infections (penicillin, cephalosporines, streptomycin, and
vancomycin) or neuropsychiatric sequelae. Research is also being conducted on the general aspects of
biophysical and biochemical properties, chemical structures and biotechnological applications of the
bioactive substances derived from marine microorganisms, and their potential use as cosmeceuticals
and nutraceuticals. This review is an attempt to consolidate the latest studies and critical
research in this field, and to showcase the immense competence of marine microbial flora as
bioactive metabolite producers. In addition, the present review addresses some effective and novel
approaches of procuring marine microbial compounds utilizing the latest screening strategies of drug
discovery.



Antitumor Peptides from Marine Organisms

The biodiversity of the marine environment and the associated chemical diversity constitute a
practically unlimited resource of new antitumor agents in the field of the development of marine
bioactive substances. In this review, the progress on studies of antitumor peptides from marine
sources is provided. The biological properties and mechanisms of action of different marine peptides
are described; information about their molecular diversity is also presented. Novel peptides that
induce apoptosis signal pathway, affect the tubulin-microtubule equilibrium and inhibit angiogenesis
are presented in association with their pharmacological properties. It is intended to provide useful
information for further research in the fields of marine antitumor peptides.



An Update on 2,5-Diketopiperazines from Marine Organisms

2,5-Diketopiperazines (2,5-DKPs) are an important category of structurally diverse cyclic dipeptides
with prominent biological properties. These 2,5-DKPs have been obtained from a variety of natural
resources, including marine organisms. Because of the increasing numbers and biological importance
of these compounds, this review covers 90 marine originated 2,5-DKPs that were reported from 2009 to
the first half-year of 2014. The review will focus on the structure characterizations, biological
properties and proposed biosynthetic processes of these compounds.



Marine Natural Products: A Way to New Drugs

The investigation of marine natural products (low molecular weight bioregulators) is a rapidly
developing scientific field at the intersection of biology and chemistry. Investigations aimed at
detecting, identifying, and understanding the structure of marine natural products have led to the
discovery of 20,000 new substances, including those characterized by an extremely high physiological
activity. Some results and prospects of works aimed at creating new drugs on the basis of marine
natural products are discussed herein.



Marine metagenomics: strategies for the discovery of novel enzymes with biotechnological applications from marine environments

Metagenomic based strategies have previously been successfully employed as powerful tools to isolate
and identify enzymes with novel biocatalytic activities from the unculturable component of microbial
communities from various terrestrial environmental niches. Both sequence based and function based
screening approaches have been employed to identify genes encoding novel biocatalytic activities and
metabolic pathways from metagenomic libraries. While much of the focus to date has centred on
terrestrial based microbial ecosystems, it is clear that the marine environment has enormous
microbial biodiversity that remains largely unstudied. Marine microbes are both extremely abundant
and diverse; the environments they occupy likewise consist of very diverse niches. As culture-
dependent methods have thus far resulted in the isolation of only a tiny percentage of the marine
microbiota the application of metagenomic strategies holds great potential to study and exploit the
enormous microbial biodiversity which is present within these marine environments.



