Nitrogen regulation of fungal secondary metabolism in fungi

Fungi occupy diverse environments where they are constantly challenged by stressors such as extreme
pH, temperature, UV exposure, and nutrient deprivation. Nitrogen is an essential requirement for
growth, and the ability to metabolize a wide variety of nitrogen sources enables fungi to colonize
different environmental niches and survive nutrient limitations. Favored nitrogen sources,
particularly ammonium and glutamine, are used preferentially, while the expression of genes required
for the use of various secondary nitrogen sources is subject to a regulatory mechanism called
nitrogen metabolite repression. Studies on gene regulation in response to nitrogen availability were
carried out first in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Aspergillus nidulans, and Neurospora crassa. These
studies revealed that fungi respond to changes in nitrogen availability with physiological and
morphological alterations and activation of differentiation processes. In all fungal species
studied, the major GATA transcription factor AreA and its co-repressor Nmr are central players of
the nitrogen regulatory network. In addition to growth and development, the quality and quantity of
nitrogen also affects the formation of a broad range of secondary metabolites (SMs). Recent studies,
mainly on species of the genus Fusarium, revealed that AreA does not only regulate a large set of
nitrogen catabolic genes, but can also be involved in regulating production of SMs. Furthermore,
several other regulators, e.g., a second GATA transcription factor, AreB, that was proposed to
negatively control nitrogen catabolic genes by competing with AreA for binding to GATA elements, was
shown to act as activator of some nitrogen-repressed as well as nitrogen-induced SM gene clusters.
This review highlights our latest understanding of canonical (AreA-dependent) and non-canonical
nitrogen regulation mechanisms by which fungi may regulate biosynthesis of certain SMs in response
to nitrogen availability.



Ecological implications of single and mixed nitrogen nutrition in Arabidopsis thaliana

Background Ecologists recognize that plants capture nitrogen in many chemical forms that include
amino acids. Access to multiple nitrogen types in plant communities has been argued to enhance plant
performance, access to nitrogen and alter ecological interactions in ways that may promote species
coexistence. However, data supporting these arguments have been limited. While it is known that
plants uptake amino acids from soil, long term studies that link amino acid uptake to measures of
plant performance and potential reproductive effort are not typically performed. Here, a series of
experiments that link uptake of nitrate, glutamine or asparagine with lifetime reproductive effort
in Arabidopsis thaliana are reported. Nitrogen was offered either singly or in mixture and at a
variety of combinations. Traits related to reproductive output were measured, as was the preference
for each type of nitrogen. Results When plants were supplied with a single nitrogen type at
concentrations from 0.1-0.9 mM, the ranking of nitrogen types was nitrate > glutamine > asparagine
in terms of the relative performance of plants. When plants were supplied with two types of nitrogen
in mixture at ratios between 0.1:0.9-0.9:0.1 mM, again plants performed best when nitrate was
present, and poorly when amino acids were mixed. Additionally, stable isotopes revealed that plants
preferentially captured nitrogen types matching the hierarchy of nitrate > glutamine > asparagine.
Comparing between the two experiments revealed that mixed nitrogen nutrition was a net cost to the
plants. Conclusions Plant performance on mixed nitrogen was less than half the performance on equal
amounts of any single nitrogen type. We asked: why did A. thaliana capture amino acids when doing so
resulted in a net cost? We argue that available data cannot yet answer this question, but
hypothesize that access to lower quality forms of nitrogen may become important when plants compete.



Stocks of carbon and nitrogen and partitioning between above- and belowground pools in the Brazilian coastal Atlantic Forest elevation range

We estimated carbon and nitrogen stocks in aboveground biomass (AGB) and belowground biomass (BGB)
along an elevation range in forest sites located on the steep slopes of the Serra do Mar on the
north coast of the State of São Paulo, southeast Brazil. In elevations of 100 m (lowland), 400 m
(submontane), and 1000 m (montane) four 1-ha plots were established, and above- (live and dead) and
belowground (live and dead) biomass were determined. Carbon and nitrogen concentrations in each
compartment were determined and used to convert biomass into carbon and nitrogen stocks. The carbon
aboveground stock (CAGB) varied along the elevation range from approximately 110 to 150 Mg·ha−1, and
nitrogen aboveground stock (NAGB), varied from approximately 1.0 to 1.9 Mg·ha−1. The carbon
belowground stock (CBGB) and the nitrogen belowground stock (NBGB) were significantly higher than
the AGB and varied along the elevation range from approximately 200–300 Mg·ha−1, and from 14 to 20
Mg·ha−1, respectively. Finally, the total carbon stock (CTOTAL) varied from approximately 320 to 460
Mg·ha−1, and the nitrogen total stock (NTOTAL) from approximately 15 to 22 Mg·ha−1. Most of the
carbon and nitrogen stocks were found belowground and not aboveground as normally found in lowland
tropical forests. The above- and belowground stocks, and consequently, the total stocks of carbon
and nitrogen increased significantly with elevation. As the soil and air temperature also decreased
significantly with elevation, we found a significantly inverse relationship between carbon and
nitrogen stocks and temperature. Using this inverse relationship, we made a first approach estimate
that an increase of 1°C in soil temperature would decrease the carbon and nitrogen stocks in
approximately 17 Mg·ha−1 and 1 Mg·ha−1 of carbon and nitrogen, respectively.



Food and feed supply and waste disposal in the industrialising city of Vienna (1830–1913): a special focus on urban nitrogen flows

 Taking an urban metabolism perspective, this article investigates food and feed consumption as well
as flows of nitrogen in the city of Vienna during the industrial transformation. It addresses the
question of the amount of agricultural products consumed in the city and their nitrogen content,
their origin and their fate after consumption. Changes in dietary nitrogen flows in nineteenth
century Vienna are embedded in the context of a socio-ecological transition from an agrarian to an
industrial socio-metabolic regime. Similarities and differences in the size and dynamics of urban
nitrogen flows in Vienna and Paris are discussed. Critical reading of historical sources and
historical material flow accounting are the methodological backbone of this study. Between 1830 and
1913, inflows of dietary nitrogen into the city increased fivefold. Throughout the time period under
observation, the urban waterscape was the most important sink for human and animal excreta. The
amount of nitrogen disposed of in the urban waterscape via urban excreta increased sevenfold. The
average daily consumption of nitrogen per capita was very similar to that in Paris, but the
composition of foodstuff differed. In Vienna, the share of meat in food consumption was considerably
higher. Both cities had to face the challenge of increasing output flows. However, urban authorities
in Vienna and Paris came to different solutions of how to deal with this challenge. Besides
institutional settings, the specific geomorphology of the cities as well as biogeographic factors
such as the absorption capacity of the Danube in Vienna and the Seine in Paris mattered.  Electronic
supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0653-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



Effect of Nitrogen on Cellular Production and Release of the Neurotoxin Anatoxin-A in a Nitrogen-Fixing Cyanobacterium

Anatoxin-a (ANTX) is a neurotoxin produced by several freshwater cyanobacteria and implicated in
lethal poisonings of domesticated animals and wildlife. The factors leading to its production in
nature and in culture are not well understood. Resource availability may influence its cellular
production as suggested by the carbon-nutrient hypothesis, which links the amount of secondary
metabolites produced by plants or microbes to the relative abundance of nutrients. We tested the
effects of nitrogen supply (as 1, 5, and 100% N of standard cyanobacterial medium corresponding to
15, 75, and 1500 mg L−1 of NaNO3 respectively) on ANTX production and release in a toxic strain of
the planktonic cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon issatschenkoi (Nostocales). We hypothesized that
nitrogen deficiency might constrain the production of ANTX. However, the total concentration and
more significantly the cellular content of anatoxin-a peaked (max. 146 μg/L and 1683 μg g−1 dry
weight) at intermediate levels of nitrogen supply when N-deficiency was evident based on phycocyanin
to chlorophyll a and carbon to nitrogen ratios. The results suggest that the cellular production of
anatoxin-a may be stimulated by moderate nitrogen stress. Maximal cellular contents of other
cyanotoxins have recently been reported under severe stress conditions in another Nostocales
species.



