A BioBrick compatible strategy for genetic modification of plants

Background Plant biotechnology can be leveraged to produce food, fuel, medicine, and materials.
Standardized methods advocated by the synthetic biology community can accelerate the plant design
cycle, ultimately making plant engineering more widely accessible to bioengineers who can contribute
diverse creative input to the design process. Results This paper presents work done largely by
undergraduate students participating in the 2010 International Genetically Engineered Machines
(iGEM) competition. Described here is a framework for engineering the model plant Arabidopsis
thaliana with standardized, BioBrick compatible vectors and parts available through the Registry of
Standard Biological Parts (http://www.partsregistry.org). This system was used to engineer a proof-
of-concept plant that exogenously expresses the taste-inverting protein miraculin. Conclusions Our
work is intended to encourage future iGEM teams and other synthetic biologists to use plants as a
genetic chassis. Our workflow simplifies the use of standardized parts in plant systems, allowing
the construction and expression of heterologous genes in plants within the timeframe allotted for
typical iGEM projects.



The intriguing plant nuclear lamina

The nuclear lamina is a complex protein mesh attached to the inner nuclear membrane (INM), which is
also associated with nuclear pore complexes. It provides mechanical support to the nucleus and
nuclear envelope, and as well as facilitating the connection of the nucleoskeleton to the
cytoskeleton, it is also involved in chromatin organization, gene regulation, and signaling. In
metazoans, the nuclear lamina consists of a polymeric layer of lamins and other interacting proteins
responsible for its association with the INM and chromatin. In plants, field emission scanning
electron microscopy of nuclei, and thin section transmission electron microscopy of isolated
nucleoskeletons, reveals the lamina to have a similar structure to that of metazoans. Moreover,
although plants lack lamin genes and the genes encoding most lamin-binding proteins, the main
functions of the lamina are fulfilled in plants. Hence, it would appear that the plant lamina is not
based on lamins and that other proteins substitute for lamins in plant cells. The nuclear matrix
constituent proteins are the best characterized structural proteins in the plant lamina. Although
these proteins do not display strong sequence similarity to lamins, their predicted secondary
structure and sub-nuclear distribution, as well as their influence on nuclear size and shape, and on
heterochromatin organization, suggest they could be functional lamin analogs. In this review we
shall summarize what is currently known about the organization and composition of the plant nuclear
lamina and its interacting complexes, and we will discuss the activity of this structure in the
plant cell and its nucleus.



Medicinal Plant Use and Health Sovereignty: Findings from the Tajik and Afghan Pamirs

Medicinal plants are indicators of indigenous knowledge in the context of political volatility and
sociocultural and ecological change in the Pamir Mountains of Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Medicinal
plants are the primary health care option in this region of Central Asia. The main objective of this
paper is to demonstrate that medicinal plants contribute to health security and sovereignty in a
time of instability. We illustrate the nutritional as well as medicinal significance of plants in
the daily lives of villagers. Based on over a decade and half of research related to resilience and
livelihood security, we present plant uses in the context of mountain communities. Villagers
identified over 58 cultivated and noncultivated plants and described 310 distinct uses within 63
categories of treatment and prevention. Presence of knowledge about medicinal plants is directly
connected to their use.



Plant Genome DataBase Japan (PGDBj): A Portal Website for the Integration of Plant Genome-Related Databases

The Plant Genome DataBase Japan (PGDBj, http://pgdbj.jp/?ln=en) is a portal website that aims to
integrate plant genome-related information from databases (DBs) and the literature. The PGDBj is
comprised of three component DBs and a cross-search engine, which provides a seamless search over
the contents of the DBs. The three DBs are as follows. (i) The Ortholog DB, providing gene cluster
information based on the amino acid sequence similarity. Over 500,000 amino acid sequences of 20
Viridiplantae species were subjected to reciprocal BLAST searches and clustered. Sequences from
plant genome DBs (e.g. TAIR10 and RAP-DB) were also included in the cluster with a direct link to
the original DB. (ii) The Plant Resource DB, integrating the SABRE DB, which provides cDNA and
genome sequence resources accumulated and maintained in the RIKEN BioResource Center and National
BioResource Projects. (iii) The DNA Marker DB, providing manually or automatically curated
information of DNA markers, quantitative trait loci and related linkage maps, from the literature
and external DBs. As the PGDBj targets various plant species, including model plants, algae, and
crops important as food, fodder and biofuel, researchers in the field of basic biology as well as a
wide range of agronomic fields are encouraged to perform searches using DNA sequences, gene names,
traits and phenotypes of interest. The PGDBj will return the search results from the component DBs
and various types of linked external DBs.



Effects of genetic modifications to flax (Linum usitatissimum) on arbuscular mycorrhiza and plant performance

Although arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are known for their positive effect on flax growth, the
impact of genetic manipulation in this crop on arbuscular mycorrhiza and plant performance was
assessed for the first time. Five types of transgenic flax that were generated to improve fiber
quality and resistance to pathogens, through increased levels of either phenylpropanoids (W92.40),
glycosyltransferase (GT4, GT5), or PR2 beta-1,3-glucanase (B14) or produce polyhydroxybutyrate
(M50), were used. Introduced genetic modifications did not change the degree of mycorrhizal
colonization as compared to parent cultivars Linola and Nike. Arbuscules were well developed in each
tested transgenic type (except M50). In two lines (W92.40 and B14), a higher abundance of arbuscules
was observed when compared to control, untransformed flax plants. However, in some cases (W92.40,
GT4, GT5, and B14 Md), the mycorrhizal dependency for biomass production of transgenic plants was
slightly lower when compared to the original cultivars. No significant influence of mycorrhiza on
the photosynthetic activity of transformed lines was found, but in most cases P concentration in
mycorrhizal plants remained higher than in nonmycorrhizal ones. The transformed flax lines meet the
demands for better quality of fiber and higher resistance to pathogens, without significantly
influencing the interaction with AMF.



