A review of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria and archaea in Chinese soils

Ammonia (NH3) oxidation, the first and rate-limiting step of nitrification, is a key step in the
global Nitrogen (N) cycle. Major advances have been made in recent years in our knowledge and
understanding of the microbial communities involved in ammonia oxidation in a wide range of
habitats, including Chinese agricultural soils. In this mini-review, we focus our attention on the
distribution and community diversity of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and ammonia oxidizing
archaea (AOA) in Chinese soils with variable soil properties and soil management practices. The
niche differentiation of AOB and AOA in contrasting soils have been functionally demonstrated using
DNA-SIP (stable isotope probing) methods, which have shown that AOA dominate nitrification processes
in acidic soils, while AOB dominated in neutral, alkaline and N-rich soils. Finally, we discuss the
composition and activity of ammonia oxidizers in paddy soils, as well as the mitigation of the
greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions and nitrate leaching via inhibition of nitrification by
both AOB and AOA.



The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon concentrations in soils in the Region of Valasske Mezirici, the Czech Republic

The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contamination of urban, agricultural and forest soil
samples was investigated from samples obtained in the surroundings of Valasske Mezirici. Valasske
Mezirici is a town located in the north-east mountainous part of the Czech Republic, where a coal
tar refinery is situated. 16 PAHs listed in the US EPA were investigated. Organic oxidizable carbon
was also observed in the forest soils. The PAH concentrations ranged from 0.86-10.84 (with one
anomalous value of 35.14) and 7.66-79.39 mg/kg dm in the urban/agricultural and forest soils,
respectively. While the PAH levels in the urban/agricultural soils are within the range typically
found in industrialized areas, the forest soils showed elevated PAH concentrations compared to other
forest soils in Western and Northern Europe. The PAH concentrations and their molecular distribution
ratios were studied as functions of the sample location and the meteorological history. The soils
from localities at higher altitudes above sea level have the highest PAH concentrations, and the PAH
concentrations decrease with increasing distance from the town.



Dynamics of Bacterial Communities in Two Unpolluted Soils after Spiking with Phenanthrene: Soil Type Specific and Common Responders

Considering their key role for ecosystem processes, it is important to understand the response of
microbial communities in unpolluted soils to pollution with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).
Phenanthrene, a model compound for PAH, was spiked to a Cambisol and a Luvisol soil. Total community
DNA from phenanthrene-spiked and control soils collected on days 0, 21, and 63 were analyzed based
on PCR-amplified 16S rRNA gene fragments. Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE)
fingerprints of bacterial communities increasingly deviated with time between spiked and control
soils. In taxon specific DGGE, significant responses of Alphaproteobacteria and Actinobacteria
became only detectable after 63 days, while significant effects on Betaproteobacteria were
detectable in both soils after 21 days. Comparison of the taxonomic distribution of bacteria in
spiked and control soils on day 63 as revealed by pyrosequencing indicated soil type specific
negative effects of phenanthrene on several taxa, many of them belonging to the Gamma-, Beta-, or
Deltaproteobacteria. Bacterial richness and evenness decreased in spiked soils. Despite the
significant differences in the bacterial community structure between both soils on day 0, similar
genera increased in relative abundance after PAH spiking, especially Sphingomonas and Polaromonas.
However, this did not result in an increased overall similarity of the bacterial communities in both
soils.



Influence of freeze-thaw events on carbon dioxide emission from soils at different moisture and land use

Background The repeated freeze-thaw events during cold season, freezing of soils in autumn and
thawing in spring are typical for the tundra, boreal, and temperate soils. The thawing of soils
during winter-summer transitions induces the release of decomposable organic carbon and acceleration
of soil respiration. The winter-spring fluxes of CO2 from permanently and seasonally frozen soils
are essential part of annual carbon budget varying from 5 to 50%. The mechanisms of the freeze-thaw
activation are not absolutely clear and need clarifying. We investigated the effect of repeated
freezing-thawing events on CO2 emission from intact arable and forest soils (Luvisols, loamy silt;
Central Germany) at different moisture (65% and 100% of WHC). Results Due to the measurement of the
CO2 flux in two hours intervals, the dynamics of CO2 emission during freezing-thawing events was
described in a detailed way. At +10°C (initial level) in soils investigated, carbon dioxide emission
varied between 7.4 to 43.8 mg C m-2h-1 depending on land use and moisture. CO2 flux from the totally
frozen soil never reached zero and amounted to 5 to 20% of the initial level, indicating that
microbial community was still active at -5°C. Significant burst of CO2 emission (1.2–1.7-fold
increase depending on moisture and land use) was observed during thawing. There was close linear
correlation between CO2 emission and soil temperature (R2 = 0.86–0.97, P < 0.001). Conclusion Our
investigations showed that soil moisture and land use governed the initial rate of soil respiration,
duration of freezing and thawing of soil, pattern of CO2 dynamics and extra CO2 fluxes. As a rule,
the emissions of CO2 induced by freezing-thawing were more significant in dry soils and during the
first freezing-thawing cycle (FTC). The acceleration of CO2 emission was caused by different
processes: the liberation of nutrients upon the soil freezing, biological activity occurring in
unfrozen water films, and respiration of cold-adapted microflora.



In Vitro Assessment of Cadmium Bioavailability in Chinese Cabbage Grown on Different Soils and Its Toxic Effects on Human Health

The minimum concentration of cadmium (Cd), by Chinese cabbage grown on Cd contaminated soils that
can initiate toxicity in human liver cells using in vitro digestion coupled with Caco-2/HL-7702 cell
models was studied. Cadmium bioaccessibility in the gastric phase for yellow soil (YS) cabbage
(40.84%) and calcareous soil (CS) cabbage (21.54%) was significantly higher than small intestinal
phase with the corresponding values of 21.2% and 11.11%, respectively. Cadmium bioavailability was
higher in YS cabbage (5.27%–14.66%) than in CS cabbage (1.12%–9.64%). Cadmium concentrations
(>0.74 μg) transported from YS and CS cabbage were able to induce oxidative (MDA, H2O2) stress by
inhibiting antioxidant (SOD, GPx) enzyme activities in human liver cells (HL-7702). Additionally the
study revealed that the ingestion of Cd contaminated Chinese cabbage grown in acidic soil (yellow
soil) weakened the antioxidant defense system under all levels of contamination (2, 6, and
9 mg·kg−1) which ultimately escalated the oxidative stress in liver cells; however, in case of CS
cabbage, a marked oxidative stress was observed only at 9 mg kg−1 Cd level of soil. Therefore, it is
necessary to monitor Cd concentrations in leafy vegetables grown on acidic soils to minimize human
health risk.



