Characterization of Species-Specific Repeats in 613 Prokaryotic Species

Prokaryotes are in general believed to possess small, compactly organized genomes, with repetitive
sequences forming only a small part of them. Nonetheless, many prokaryotic genomes in fact contain
species-specific repeats (>85 bp long genomic sequences with less than 60% identity to other
species) as we have previously demonstrated. However, it is not known at present how frequent such
species-specific repeats are and what their functional roles in bacterial genomes may be. Therefore,
we have conducted a comprehensive survey of prokaryotic species-specific repeats and characterized
them to examine as to whether there are functional classes among different repeats or not and how
they are mutually related to each other. Of the 613 distinct prokaryotic species analyzed, 97% were
found to contain at least one species-specific repeats. It seems interesting to note that the
species-specific repeats thus identified appear to be functionally variable in different genomes: in
some genomes, they are mostly associated with duplicated protein-coding genes, whereas in some other
genomes with rRNA and tRNA genes. Contrary to what may be expected, only one-fourth of the species-
specific repeats were found to be associated with mobile genetic elements.



The genetic integrity of bacterial species: the core genome and the accessory genome, two different stories

Strains within a bacterial species typically have a set of conserved core genes and a variable set
of accessory genes. The accessory genes often appear to move laterally between strains, thereby
forming new trait combinations. Sometimes, genetic material also moves laterally between species,
thereby resulting in diffuse borders between them. The growing number of genome sequences offers new
possibilities to study these processes. Ten species for which abundant genomic data exists were here
selected for analysis of the species border integrity. The average core genome similarities and
relative core genome sizes (RCGSs) were determined for strain pairs within the species and for
strain pairs crossing the species border. The variability within the species as well as the border
integrity varies for different bacterial species. Some have very distinct borders while others are
more or less indefinable. From the growing amount of genomic data, it becomes even clearer that the
concept of bacterial species is, in many cases, far from absolute.



Species richness and macronutrient content of wawo worms (Polychaeta, Annelida) from Ambonese waters, Maluku, Indonesia

The aims of this research were to: (1) investigate the species richness of wawo worms, and to (2)
analyze macronutrient content of the worms. Wawo worms were sampled using a fishing net on March
18th-19th, 2014, from Ambonese waters, Maluku. As many as 26 wawo species belonging to 5 families
were identified. Palola sp. was identified as the most abundant species of wawo, followed by
Lysidice oele, Horst 1905, Eunice spp. and nereidids. Results of the proximate analysis reveal that
female epitokes of Palola sp. contain 10.78 % ash, 10.71 % moisture, 11.67 % crude fat, 54.72 %
crude protein and 12.12 % carbohydrate.



Protura of Italy, with a key to species and their distribution

The Italian Protura were studied basing on 5103 specimens from 198 sampling areas, along with
bibliographic data from 49 collecting sites. 17 out of the 20 Italian regions are covered. As a
result, 40 species have been identified (belonging to 8 genera and 4 families), 6 of which are new
records for the Italian fauna. A key to the Italian species is reported, followed by a series of
distribution maps and brief remarks for some of them. A preliminary biogeographical overview allowed
us to delineate the chorological categories of these species, 10 of which are actually known only in
Italy. The comparison with the species richness known for some best studied Central and Eastern
European Countries leads us to speculate that widening our research, Italian Protura check-list will
be much implemented.



Fatal attraction: rare species in the spotlight

The exploitation of rare and endangered species can end in the species's extinction because the
increased value people associate with rarity increases the economic incentive to exploit the last
individuals, creating a positive feedback loop. This recently proposed concept, called the
anthropogenic Allee effect (AAE), relies on the assumption that people do value rarity, but this
remains to be established. Moreover, it also remains to be determined whether attraction to rarity
is a trait confined to a minority of hobbyists (e.g. wildlife collectors, exotic pet owners) or
characteristic of the general public. We estimated how much the general public valued rare species
compared with common ones, using five different metrics related to personal investment: time spent,
physical effort, unpleasantness, economic investment and risk. We surveyed the visitors of a zoo. To
see the rare species, the visitors to the zoo invested more time in searching and contemplation,
they were ready to expend more physical effort, they tolerated more unpleasant conditions, they were
willing to pay more and, finally, they risked more to obtain (steal) a rare species. Our results
provide substantial evidence of how the general public places more value on rare species, compared
with common species. This confirms the AAE as an actual process, which in addition concerns a large
part of the population. This has important consequences for the conservation of species that are
rare now, or that could become so in the future.



