Fermented Fruits and Vegetables of Asia: A Potential Source of Probiotics

As world population increases, lactic acid fermentation is expected to become an important role in
preserving fresh vegetables, fruits, and other food items for feeding humanity in developing
countries. However, several fermented fruits and vegetables products (Sauerkraut, Kimchi, Gundruk,
Khalpi, Sinki, etc.) have a long history in human nutrition from ancient ages and are associated
with the several social aspects of different communities. Among the food items, fruits and
vegetables are easily perishable commodities due to their high water activity and nutritive values.
These conditions are more critical in tropical and subtropical countries which favour the growth of
spoilage causing microorganisms. Lactic acid fermentation increases shelf life of fruits and
vegetables and also enhances several beneficial properties, including nutritive value and flavours,
and reduces toxicity. Fermented fruits and vegetables can be used as a potential source of
probiotics as they harbour several lactic acid bacteria such as Lactobacillus plantarum, L.
pentosus, L. brevis, L. acidophilus, L. fermentum, Leuconostoc fallax, and L. mesenteroides. As a
whole, the traditionally fermented fruits and vegetables not only serve as food supplements but also
attribute towards health benefits. This review aims to describe some important Asian fermented
fruits and vegetables and their significance as a potential source of probiotics.



Assessments of Drought Impacts on Vegetation in China with the Optimal Time Scales of the Climatic Drought Index

Drought is expected to increase in frequency and severity due to global warming, and its impacts on
vegetation are typically extensively evaluated with climatic drought indices, such as multi-scalar
Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI). We analyzed the covariation between the
SPEIs of various time scales and the anomalies of the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI),
from which the vegetation type-related optimal time scales were retrieved. The results indicated
that the optimal time scales of needle-leaved forest, broadleaf forest and shrubland were between 10
and 12 months, which were considerably longer than the grassland, meadow and cultivated vegetation
ones (2 to 4 months). When the optimal vegetation type-related time scales were used, the SPEI could
better reflect the vegetation’s responses to water conditions, with the correlation coefficients
between SPEIs and NDVI anomalies increased by 5.88% to 28.4%. We investigated the spatio-temporal
characteristics of drought and quantified the different responses of vegetation growth to drought
during the growing season (April–October). The results revealed that the frequency of drought has
increased in the 21st century with the drying trend occurring in most of China. These results are
useful for ecological assessments and adapting management steps to mitigate the impact of drought on
vegetation. They are helpful to employ water resources more efficiently and reduce potential damage
to human health caused by water shortages.



Synthesized Attributes of Water Use by Regional Vegetation: A Key to Cognition of “Water Pump” Viewpoint

Recently, the frequent seasonal drought in Southwest China has brought considerable concerns and
continuous heated arguments on the “water pump” viewpoint (i.e., the water demand from Hevea spp.
and Eucalyptus spp. can be treated as a water pump) once again. However, such viewpoint just focused
on water consumption from vegetation transpiration and its ecoenvironment impacts, which had not
considered other attributes of vegetation, namely, water saving and drought resistance, and
hydrological regulation (water conservation) into consideration. Thus, in this paper, the
synthesized attributes of regional vegetation water use had been mainly discussed. The results
showed that the study on such aspects as the characters of water consumption from vegetation
transpiration, the potential of water saving and drought resistance, and the effects of hydrological
regulation in Southwest China lagged far behind, let alone the report on synthesized attributes of
water utilization with the organic combination of the three aspects above or the paralleled
analysis. Accordingly, in this paper, the study on the synthesized attributes of water use by
regional vegetation in Southwest China was suggested, and the objectives of such a special study
were clarified, targeting the following aspects: (i) characters of water consumption from
transpiration of regional typical artificial vegetation; (ii) potential of water saving and drought
resistance of regional typical artificial vegetation; (iii) effects of hydrological regulation of
regional typical artificial vegetation; (iv) synthesized attributes of water use by regional typical
artificial vegetation. It is expected to provide a new idea for the scientific assessment on the
regional vegetation ecoenvironment effects and theoretical guidance for the regional vegetation
reconstruction and ecological restoration.



Development of vegetable farming: a cause of the emergence of insecticide resistance in populations of Anopheles gambiae in urban areas of Benin

Background A fast development of urban agriculture has recently taken place in many areas in the
Republic of Benin. This study aims to assess the rapid expansion of urban agriculture especially,
its contribution to the emergence of insecticide resistance in populations of Anopheles gambiae.
Methods The protocol was based on the collection of sociological data by interviewing vegetable
farmers regarding various agricultural practices and the types of pesticides used. Bioassay tests
were performed to assess the susceptibility of malaria vectors to various agricultural insecticides
and biochemical analysis were done to characterize molecular status of population of An. gambiae.
Results This research showed that: (1) The rapid development of urban agriculture is related to
unemployment observed in cities, rural exodus and the search for a balanced diet by urban
populations; (2) Urban agriculture increases the farmers' household income and their living
standard; (3) At a molecular level, PCR revealed the presence of three sub-species of An. gambiae
(An. gambiae s.s., Anopheles melas and Anopheles arabiensis) and two molecular forms (M and S). The
kdr west mutation recorded in samples from the three sites and more specifically on the M forms
seems to be one of the major resistance mechanisms found in An. gambiae from agricultural areas.
Insecticide susceptibility tests conducted during this research revealed a clear pattern of
resistance to permethrin (76% mortality rate at Parakou; 23.5% at Porto-Novo and 17% at Cotonou).
Conclusion This study confirmed an increase activity of the vegetable farming in urban areas of
Benin. This has led to the use of insecticide in an improper manner to control vegetable pests, thus
exerting a huge selection pressure on mosquito larval population, which resulted to the emergence of
insecticide resistance in malaria vectors.



Stages of change to increase fruit and vegetable intake and its relationships with fruit and vegetable intake and related psychosocial factors

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES Understanding individual's intention, action and maintenance to increase fruit
and vegetable intake is an initial step in designing nutrition or health promotion programs. This
study aimed to determine stages of change to increase fruit and vegetable intake and its
relationships with fruit and vegetable intake, self-efficacy, perceived benefits and perceived
barriers. SUBJECTS/METHODS This cross-sectional study was conducted among 348 public university
staff in Universiti Putra Malaysia. A pre-tested self-administered questionnaire and two days
24-hour diet recall were used. RESULTS Half of the respondents (50%) were in preparation stage,
followed by 43% in action/maintenance, 7% in pre-contemplation/contemplation stages. Respondents in
action/maintenance stages had significantly higher self-efficacy (F = 9.17, P < 0.001) and perceived
benefits (F = 5.07, P < 0.01) while respondents in pre-contemplation/contemplation and preparation
stages had significantly higher perceived barriers (F = 4.83, P < 0.05). Perceived benefits tend to
outweigh perceived barriers pre-ceding to taking action. Self-efficacy is important in motivating
individuals to increase fruit and vegetable intake as self-efficacy and perceived barriers crossed
over between preparation and action/maintenance. Respondents in action/maintenance stages had the
highest adjusted mean serving of fruit and vegetable intake (F = 4.52, P < 0.05) but the intake did
not meet recommendation. CONCLUSION Intervention strategies should emphasize on increasing perceived
benefits and building self-efficacy by providing knowledge and skills to consume a diet high in
fruits and vegetables in order to promote healthy changes in having high fruit and vegetable intake.



