The preference for water nipples vs. water bowls in dairy goats

Background Previous studies have reported that the design of the water dispensers can influence the
water intake in farm animals. Horses and dairy cows seem to prefer to drink from an open surface
whereas sheep and pigs apparently prefer water nipples, probably because of the worse water quality
in water bowls. The aim of the present study was to examine the preference of dairy goats for water
nipples or water bowls. Methods In each of the two experiments (exp. 1, dry goats, exp. 2 lactating
goats), 42 dairy goats were allotted into 6 groups of 7 goats. In period 1, the goats had access to
a water nipple. In period 2, they had access to a water bowl and in period 3 (preference test) they
had access to both a water nipple and a water bowl. Water usage and wastage was recorded and water
intake (water usage - water wastage) was calculated for each group for the two last days of each
period. In experiment 2, water samples from each dispenser were analyzed for heterotrophy germs at
22°C, Escherichia coli and turbidity. Results Water usage was higher from water nipples than from
water bowls both in experiment 1 (dry goats) and experiment 2 (lactating goats). There was however,
no difference in water intake from water nipples and water bowls. In the preference test (period 3),
the water intake tended to be higher from the water nipple than from the water bowl both for the dry
goats (exp. 1) and lactating goats (exp. 2). Especially for the dry goats, the differences between
groups were large. Turbidity and heterotrophy germs were much higher in the samples from the water
bowls than from the water nipples. Water wastage from the water bowls was negligible compared to the
water nipples. From the water nipples the water wastage was 30% and 23% of water usage for the dry
and lactating goats respectively. Conclusions We conclude that type of water dispenser (nipple or
bowl) was probably of minor importance for water intake in goats, but water bowls had a lower water
quality.



What affects public acceptance of recycled and desalinated water?

This paper identifies factors that are associated with higher levels of public acceptance for
recycled and desalinated water. For the first time, a wide range of hypothesized factors, both of
socio-demographic and psychographic nature, are included simultaneously. The key results, based on a
survey study of about 3000 respondents are that: (1) drivers of the stated likelihood of using
desalinated water differ somewhat from drivers of the stated likelihood of using recycled water; (2)
positive perceptions of, and knowledge about, the respective water source are key drivers for the
stated likelihood of usage; and (3) awareness of water scarcity, as well as prior experience with
using water from alternative sources, increases the stated likelihood of use. Practical
recommendations for public policy makers, such as key messages to be communicated to the public, are
derived.



Risk Factors Associated with the Choice to Drink Bottled Water and Tap Water in Rural Saskatchewan

A cross-sectional study investigated risk factors associated with choices to drink bottled water and
tap water in rural Saskatchewan. Of 7,500 anonymous postal questionnaires mailed out, 2,065
responses were analyzed using generalized linear mixed models. Those who reported a water advisory
(p < 0.001) or living in the area for ≤10 years (p = 0.01) were more likely to choose bottled water.
Those who reported tap water was not safe to drink were more likely to choose bottled water, an
effect greater for those who had no aesthetic complaints (p ≤ 0.001), while those with aesthetic
complaints were more likely to choose bottled water if they believed the water was safe (p < 0.001).
Respondents who treated their water and did not use a community supply were more likely to choose
bottled water (p < 0.001), while those who did not treat their water were more likely to choose
bottled water regardless of whether a community supply was used (p < 0.001). A similar pattern of
risk factors was associated with a decreased likelihood of consuming tap water daily; however, the
use of a community water supply was not significant. Understanding the factors involved in drinking
water choices could inform public health education efforts regarding water management in rural
areas.



Importance of Residual Water Permeability on the Excretion of Water during Water Diuresis in Rats

When the concentration of sodium (Na+) in arterial plasma (PNa) declines sufficiently to inhibit the
release of vasopressin, water will be excreted promptly when the vast majority of aquaporin 2 water
channels (AQP2) have been removed from luminal membranes of late distal nephron segments. In this
setting, the volume of filtrate delivered distally sets the upper limit on the magnitude of the
water diuresis. Since there is an unknown volume of water reabsorbed in the late distal nephron, our
objective was to provide a quantitative assessment of this parameter. Accordingly, rats were given a
large oral water load, while minimizing non-osmotic stimuli for the release of vasopressin. The
composition of plasma and urine were measured. The renal papilla was excised during the water
diuresis to assess the osmotic driving force for water reabsorption in the inner medullary
collecting duct. During water diuresis, the concentration of creatinine in the urine was 13-fold
higher than in plasma, which implies that ~8% of filtered water was excreted. The papillary
interstitial osmolality was 600 mOsm/L > the urine osmolality. Since 17% of filtered water is
delivered to the earliest distal convoluted tubule micropuncture site, we conclude that half of the
water delivered to the late distal nephron is reabsorbed downstream during water diuresis. The
enormous osmotic driving force for the reabsorption of water in the inner medullary collecting duct
may play a role in this reabsorption of water. Possible clinical implications are illustrated in the
discussion of a case example.



Competition for water for the food system

Although the global agricultural system will need to provide more food for a growing and wealthier
population in decades to come, increasing demands for water and potential impacts of climate change
pose threats to food systems. We review the primary threats to agricultural water availability, and
model the potential effects of increases in municipal and industrial (M&I) water demands,
environmental flow requirements (EFRs) and changing water supplies given climate change. Our models
show that, together, these factors cause an 18 per cent reduction in the availability of worldwide
water for agriculture by 2050. Meeting EFRs, which can necessitate more than 50 per cent of the mean
annual run-off in a basin depending on its hydrograph, presents the single biggest threat to
agricultural water availability. Next are increases in M&I demands, which are projected to increase
upwards of 200 per cent by 2050 in developing countries with rapidly increasing populations and
incomes. Climate change will affect the spatial and temporal distribution of run-off, and thus
affect availability from the supply side. The combined effect of these factors can be dramatic in
particular hotspots, which include northern Africa, India, China, parts of Europe, the western US
and eastern Australia, among others.



