Can Joint Carbon and Biodiversity Management in Tropical Agroforestry Landscapes Be Optimized?

Managing ecosystems for carbon storage may also benefit biodiversity conservation, but such a
potential ‘win-win’ scenario has not yet been assessed for tropical agroforestry landscapes. We
measured above- and below-ground carbon stocks as well as the species richness of four groups of
plants and eight of animals on 14 representative plots in Sulawesi, Indonesia, ranging from natural
rainforest to cacao agroforests that have replaced former natural forest. The conversion of natural
forests with carbon stocks of 227–362 Mg C ha−1 to agroforests with 82–211 Mg C ha−1 showed no
relationships to overall biodiversity but led to a significant loss of forest-related species
richness. We conclude that the conservation of the forest-related biodiversity, and to a lesser
degree of carbon stocks, mainly depends on the preservation of natural forest habitats. In the three
most carbon-rich agroforestry systems, carbon stocks were about 60% of those of natural forest,
suggesting that 1.6 ha of optimally managed agroforest can contribute to the conservation of carbon
stocks as much as 1 ha of natural forest. However, agroforestry systems had comparatively low
biodiversity, and we found no evidence for a tight link between carbon storage and biodiversity.
Yet, potential win-win agroforestry management solutions include combining high shade-tree quality
which favours biodiversity with cacao-yield adapted shade levels.



Representation of Ecosystem Services by Terrestrial Protected Areas: Chile as a Case Study

Protected areas are increasingly considered to play a key role in the global maintenance of
ecosystem processes and the ecosystem services they provide. It is thus vital to assess the extent
to which existing protected area systems represent those services. Here, for the first time, we
document the effectiveness of the current Chilean protected area system and its planned extensions
in representing both ecosystem services (plant productivity, carbon storage and agricultural
production) and biodiversity. Additionally, we evaluate the effectiveness of protected areas based
on their respective management objectives. Our results show that existing protected areas in Chile
do not contain an unusually high proportion of carbon storage (14.9%), agricultural production
(0.2%) or biodiversity (11.8%), and also represent a low level of plant productivity (Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index of 0.38). Proposed additional priority sites enhance the representation
of ecosystem services and biodiversity, but not sufficiently to attain levels of representation
higher than would be expected for their area of coverage. Moreover, when the species groups were
assessed separately, amphibians was the only one well represented. Suggested priority sites for
biodiversity conservation, without formal protection yet, was the only protected area category that
over-represents carbon storage, agricultural production and biodiversity. The low representation of
ecosystem services and species’ distribution ranges by the current protected area system is because
these protected areas are heavily biased toward southern Chile, and contain large extents of ice and
bare rock. The designation and management of proposed priority sites needs to be addressed in order
to increase the representation of ecosystem services within the Chilean protected area system.



Reconciling agriculture, carbon and biodiversity in a savannah transformation frontier.

Rapidly rising populations and likely increases in incomes in sub-Saharan Africa make tens of
millions of hectares of cropland expansion nearly inevitable, even with large increases in crop
yields. Much of that expansion is likely to occur in higher rainfall savannas, with substantial
costs to biodiversity and carbon storage. Zambia presents an acute example of this challenge, with
an expected tripling of population by 2050, good potential to expand maize and soya bean production,
and large areas of relatively undisturbed miombo woodland and associated habitat types of high
biodiversity value. Here, we present a new model designed to explore the potential for targeting
agricultural expansion in ways that achieve quantitatively optimal trade-offs between competing
economic and environmental objectives: total converted land area (the reciprocal of potential
yield); carbon loss, biodiversity loss and transportation costs. To allow different interests to
find potential compromises, users can apply varying weights to examine the effects of their
subjective preferences on the spatial allocation of new cropland and its costs. We find that small
compromises from the objective to convert the highest yielding areas permit large savings in
transportation costs, and the carbon and biodiversity impacts resulting from savannah conversion.
For example, transferring just 30% of weight from a yield-maximizing objective equally between
carbon and biodiversity protection objectives would increase total cropland area by just 2.7%, but
result in avoided costs of 27-47% for carbon, biodiversity and transportation. Compromise solutions
tend to focus agricultural expansion along existing transportation corridors and in already
disturbed areas. Used appropriately, this type of model could help countries find agricultural
expansion alternatives and related infrastructure and land use policies that help achieve production
targets while helping to conserve Africa's rapidly transforming savannahs.This article is part of
the themed issue 'Tropical grassy biomes: linking ecology, human use and conservation'.



Carbon pools recover more quickly than plant biodiversity in tropical secondary forests.

Although increasing efforts are being made to restore tropical forests, little information is
available regarding the time scales required for carbon and plant biodiversity to recover to the
values associated with undisturbed forests. To address this knowledge gap, we carried out a meta-
analysis comparing data from more than 600 secondary tropical forest sites with nearby undisturbed
reference forests. Above-ground biomass approached equivalence to reference values within 80 years
since last disturbance, whereas below-ground biomass took longer to recover. Soil carbon content
showed little relationship with time since disturbance. Tree species richness recovered after about
50 years. By contrast, epiphyte richness did not reach equivalence to undisturbed forests. The
proportion of undisturbed forest trees and epiphyte species found in secondary forests was low and
changed little over time. Our results indicate that carbon pools and biodiversity show different
recovery rates under passive, secondary succession and that colonization by undisturbed forest plant
species is slow. Initiatives such as the Convention on Biological Diversity and REDD+ should
therefore encourage active management to help to achieve their aims of restoring both carbon and
biodiversity in tropical forests.



Harnessing carbon payments to protect biodiversity.

Initiatives to reduce carbon emissions from deforestation and degradation (REDD) are providing
increasing incentives for forest protection. The collateral benefits for biodiversity depend on the
extent to which emissions reductions and biodiversity conservation can be achieved in the same
places. Globally, we demonstrate spatial trade-offs in allocating funds to protect forests for
carbon and biodiversity and show that cost-effective spending for REDD would protect relatively few
species of forest vertebrates. Because trade-offs are nonlinear, we discover that minor adjustments
to the allocation of funds could double the biodiversity protected by REDD, while reducing carbon
outcomes by only 4 to 8%.



