Can Wide Consultation Help with Setting Priorities for Large-Scale Biodiversity Monitoring Programs?

Climate and other global change phenomena affecting biodiversity require monitoring to track
ecosystem changes and guide policy and management actions. Designing a biodiversity monitoring
program is a difficult task that requires making decisions that often lack consensus due to
budgetary constrains. As monitoring programs require long-term investment, they also require strong
and continuing support from all interested parties. As such, stakeholder consultation is key to
identify priorities and make sound design decisions that have as much support as possible. Here, we
present the results of a consultation conducted to serve as an aid for designing a large-scale
biodiversity monitoring program for the province of Québec (Canada). The consultation took the form
of a survey with 13 discrete choices involving tradeoffs in respect to design priorities and 10
demographic questions (e.g., age, profession). The survey was sent to thousands of individuals
having expected interests and knowledge about biodiversity and was completed by 621 participants.
Overall, consensuses were few and it appeared difficult to create a design fulfilling the priorities
of the majority. Most participants wanted 1) a monitoring design covering the entire territory and
focusing on natural habitats; 2) a focus on species related to ecosystem services, on threatened and
on invasive species. The only demographic characteristic that was related to the type of
prioritization was the declared level of knowledge in biodiversity (null to high), but even then the
influence was quite small.



Species Richness and Trophic Diversity Increase Decomposition in a Co-Evolved Food Web

Ecological communities show great variation in species richness, composition and food web structure
across similar and diverse ecosystems. Knowledge of how this biodiversity relates to ecosystem
functioning is important for understanding the maintenance of diversity and the potential effects of
species losses and gains on ecosystems. While research often focuses on how variation in species
richness influences ecosystem processes, assessing species richness in a food web context can
provide further insight into the relationship between diversity and ecosystem functioning and
elucidate potential mechanisms underpinning this relationship. Here, we assessed how species
richness and trophic diversity affect decomposition rates in a complete aquatic food web: the five
trophic level web that occurs within water-filled leaves of the northern pitcher plant, Sarracenia
purpurea. We identified a trophic cascade in which top-predators — larvae of the pitcher-plant
mosquito — indirectly increased bacterial decomposition by preying on bactivorous protozoa. Our data
also revealed a facultative relationship in which larvae of the pitcher-plant midge increased
bacterial decomposition by shredding detritus. These important interactions occur only in food webs
with high trophic diversity, which in turn only occur in food webs with high species richness. We
show that species richness and trophic diversity underlie strong linkages between food web structure
and dynamics that influence ecosystem functioning. The importance of trophic diversity and species
interactions in determining how biodiversity relates to ecosystem functioning suggests that simply
focusing on species richness does not give a complete picture as to how ecosystems may change with
the loss or gain of species.



Plant Diversity Impacts Decomposition and Herbivory via Changes in Aboveground Arthropods

Loss of plant diversity influences essential ecosystem processes as aboveground productivity, and
can have cascading effects on the arthropod communities in adjacent trophic levels. However, few
studies have examined how those changes in arthropod communities can have additional impacts on
ecosystem processes caused by them (e.g. pollination, bioturbation, predation, decomposition,
herbivory). Therefore, including arthropod effects in predictions of the impact of plant diversity
loss on such ecosystem processes is an important but little studied piece of information. In a
grassland biodiversity experiment, we addressed this gap by assessing aboveground decomposer and
herbivore communities and linking their abundance and diversity to rates of decomposition and
herbivory. Path analyses showed that increasing plant diversity led to higher abundance and
diversity of decomposing arthropods through higher plant biomass. Higher species richness of
decomposers, in turn, enhanced decomposition. Similarly, species-rich plant communities hosted a
higher abundance and diversity of herbivores through elevated plant biomass and C:N ratio, leading
to higher herbivory rates. Integrating trophic interactions into the study of biodiversity effects
is required to understand the multiple pathways by which biodiversity affects ecosystem functioning.



Inconsistent impacts of decomposer diversity on the stability of aboveground and belowground ecosystem functions

The intensive discussion on the importance of biodiversity for the stability of essential processes
in ecosystems has prompted a multitude of studies since the middle of the last century.
Nevertheless, research has been extremely biased by focusing on the producer level, while studies on
the impacts of decomposer diversity on the stability of ecosystem functions are lacking. Here, we
investigate the impacts of decomposer diversity on the stability (reliability) of three important
aboveground and belowground ecosystem functions: primary productivity (shoot and root biomass),
litter decomposition, and herbivore infestation. For this, we analyzed the results of three
laboratory experiments manipulating decomposer diversity (1–3 species) in comparison to decomposer-
free treatments in terms of variability of the measured variables. Decomposer diversity often
significantly but inconsistently affected the stability of all aboveground and belowground ecosystem
functions investigated in the present study. While primary productivity was mainly destabilized,
litter decomposition and aphid infestation were essentially stabilized by increasing decomposer
diversity. However, impacts of decomposer diversity varied between plant community and fertility
treatments. There was no general effect of the presence of decomposers on stability and no trend
toward weaker effects in fertilized communities and legume communities. This indicates that impacts
of decomposers are based on more than effects on nutrient availability. Although inconsistent
impacts complicate the estimation of consequences of belowground diversity loss, underpinning
mechanisms of the observed patterns are discussed. Impacts of decomposer diversity on the stability
of essential ecosystem functions differed between plant communities of varying composition and
fertility, implicating that human-induced changes of biodiversity and land-use management might have
unpredictable effects on the processes mankind relies on. This study therefore points to the
necessity of also considering soil feedback mechanisms in order to gain a comprehensive and holistic
understanding of the impacts of current global change phenomena on the stability of essential
ecosystem functions.



The effect of latitudinal gradient on the species diversity of Chinese litter-dwelling thrips

To understand the global distribution patterns of litter-dwelling thrips, a total 150 leaf litter
samples were collected from 6 natural reserves located in three climatic regions, temperate,
subtropical and tropical. The results showed the relative abundance of Thysanoptera was over 3.0% in
4 natural reserves from subtropical and tropical zone, and reached 5.9% in one tropical reserve,
only less than Acarina and Collembola. In contrast it was only 0.3% in the warm temperate natural
reserves, and no thrips were collected in a mid temperate reserve. The order on the average species
numbers per plot of litter thrips was tropic > subtropics > temperate (n=25, p<0.05). Mean density
of litter thrips per plots in the tropics and subtropics was significantly higher than that in the
temperate region (n=25, p<0.05), but the average density was not significantly different between
tropical and subtropical zones (n=25, p>0.05). The diversity of litter thrips in the tropics and
subtropics was much higher than that in the temperate area based on comparsions of Shannon-Wiener
diversity index (H’), Pielou eveness index (J), and Simpson dominance index (D). All of these
results indicated that litter-dwelling thrips lived mainly in tropical and subtropical regions;
meanwhile, species number and relative abundance increased with decreasing latitude.



