Botany, Genetics and Ethnobotany: A Crossed Investigation on the Elusive Tapir's Diet in French Guiana

While the populations of large herbivores are being depleted in many tropical rainforests, the
importance of their trophic role in the ecological functioning and biodiversity of these ecosystems
is still not well evaluated. This is due to the outstanding plant diversity that they feed upon and
the inherent difficulties involved in observing their elusive behaviour. Classically, the diet of
elusive tropical herbivores is studied through the observation of browsing signs and macroscopic
analysis of faeces or stomach contents. In this study, we illustrate that the original coupling of
classic methods with genetic and ethnobotanical approaches yields information both about the diet
diversity, the foraging modalities and the potential impact on vegetation of the largest terrestrial
mammal of Amazonia, the lowland tapir. The study was conducted in the Guianan shield, where the
ecology of tapirs has been less investigated. We identified 92 new species, 51 new genera and 13 new
families of plants eaten by tapirs. We discuss the relative contribution of our different
approaches, notably the contribution of genetic barcoding, used for the first time to investigate
the diet of a large tropical mammal, and how local traditional ecological knowledge is accredited
and valuable for research on the ecology of elusive animals.


Moving beyond abundance distributions: neutral theory and spatial patterns in a tropical forest

Assessing the relative importance of different processes that determine the spatial distribution of
species and the dynamics in highly diverse plant communities remains a challenging question in
ecology. Previous modelling approaches often focused on single aggregated forest diversity patterns
that convey limited information on the underlying dynamic processes. Here, we use recent advances in
inference for stochastic simulation models to evaluate the ability of a spatially explicit and
spatially continuous neutral model to quantitatively predict six spatial and non-spatial patterns
observed at the 50 ha tropical forest plot on Barro Colorado Island, Panama. The patterns capture
different aspects of forest dynamics and biodiversity structure, such as annual mortality rate,
species richness, species abundance distribution, beta-diversity and the species–area relationship
(SAR). The model correctly predicted each pattern independently and up to five patterns
simultaneously. However, the model was unable to match the SAR and beta-diversity simultaneously.
Our study moves previous theory towards a dynamic spatial theory of biodiversity and demonstrates
the value of spatial data to identify ecological processes. This opens up new avenues to evaluate
the consequences of additional process for community assembly and dynamics.



Consequences of tropical land use for multitrophic biodiversity and ecosystem functioning

Our knowledge about land-use impacts on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning is mostly limited to
single trophic levels, leaving us uncertain about whole-community biodiversity-ecosystem functioning
relationships. We analyse consequences of the globally important land-use transformation from
tropical forests to oil palm plantations. Species diversity, density and biomass of invertebrate
communities suffer at least 45% decreases from rainforest to oil palm. Combining metabolic and food-
web theory, we calculate annual energy fluxes to model impacts of land-use intensification on
multitrophic ecosystem functioning. We demonstrate a 51% reduction in energy fluxes from forest to
oil palm communities. Species loss clearly explains variation in energy fluxes; however, this
relationship depends on land-use systems and functional feeding guilds, whereby predators are the
most heavily affected. Biodiversity decline from forest to oil palm is thus accompanied by even
stronger reductions in functionality, threatening to severely limit the functional resilience of
communities to cope with future global changes.  Transformation of natural ecosystems into
agricultural land is usually accompanied by extensive biodiversity loss. Calculating multitrophic
energy fluxes, Barnes et al. report severe reductions of biodiversity and ecosystem functioning from
tropical rainforest to oil-palm plantations.



Do riparian reserves support dung beetle biodiversity and ecosystem services in oil palm-dominated tropical landscapes?

Agricultural expansion and intensification are major threats to global biodiversity, ecological
functions, and ecosystem services. The rapid expansion of oil palm in forested tropical landscapes
is of particular concern given their high biodiversity. Identifying management approaches that
maintain native species and associated ecological processes within oil palm plantations is therefore
a priority. Riparian reserves are strips of forest retained alongside rivers in cultivated areas,
primarily for their positive hydrological impact. However, they can also support a range of forest-
dependent species or ecosystem services. We surveyed communities of dung beetles and measured dung
removal activity in an oil palm-dominated landscape in Sabah, Malaysian Borneo. The species
richness, diversity, and functional group richness of dung beetles in riparian reserves were
significantly higher than in oil palm, but lower than in adjacent logged forests. The community
composition of the riparian reserves was more similar to logged forest than oil palm. Despite the
pronounced differences in biodiversity, we did not find significant differences in dung removal
rates among land uses. We also found no evidence that riparian reserves enhance dung removal rates
within surrounding oil palm. These results contrast previous studies showing positive relationships
between dung beetle species richness and dung removal in tropical forests. We found weak but
significant positive relationships between riparian reserve width and dung beetle diversity, and
between reserve vegetation complexity and dung beetle abundance, suggesting that these features may
increase the conservation value of riparian reserves. Synthesis and applications: The similarity
between riparian reserves and logged forest demonstrates that retaining riparian reserves increases
biodiversity within oil palm landscapes. However, the lack of correlation between dung beetle
community characteristics and dung removal highlights the need for further research into spatial
variation in biodiversity–ecosystem function relationships and how the results of such studies are
affected by methodological choices.




Biodiversity Mapping in a Tropical West African Forest with Airborne Hyperspectral Data

Tropical forests are major repositories of biodiversity, but are fast disappearing as land is
converted to agriculture. Decision-makers need to know which of the remaining forests to prioritize
for conservation, but the only spatial information on forest biodiversity has, until recently, come
from a sparse network of ground-based plots. Here we explore whether airborne hyperspectral imagery
can be used to predict the alpha diversity of upper canopy trees in a West African forest. The
abundance of tree species were collected from 64 plots (each 1250 m2 in size) within a Sierra
Leonean national park, and Shannon-Wiener biodiversity indices were calculated. An airborne
spectrometer measured reflectances of 186 bands in the visible and near-infrared spectral range at 1
m2 resolution. The standard deviations of these reflectance values and their first-order derivatives
were calculated for each plot from the c. 1250 pixels of hyperspectral information within them.
Shannon-Wiener indices were then predicted from these plot-based reflectance statistics using a
machine-learning algorithm (Random Forest). The regression model fitted the data well
(pseudo-R2 = 84.9%), and we show that standard deviations of green-band reflectances and infra-red
region derivatives had the strongest explanatory powers. Our work shows that airborne hyperspectral
sensing can be very effective at mapping canopy tree diversity, because its high spatial resolution
allows within-plot heterogeneity in reflectance to be characterized, making it an effective tool for
monitoring forest biodiversity over large geographic scales.



