Reading the Complex Skipper Butterfly Fauna of One Tropical Place

Background An intense, 30-year, ongoing biodiversity inventory of Lepidoptera, together with their
food plants and parasitoids, is centered on the rearing of wild-caught caterpillars in the 120,000
terrestrial hectares of dry, rain, and cloud forest of Area de Conservacion Guanacaste (ACG) in
northwestern Costa Rica. Since 2003, DNA barcoding of all species has aided their identification and
discovery. We summarize the process and results for a large set of the species of two speciose
subfamilies of ACG skipper butterflies (Hesperiidae) and emphasize the effectiveness of barcoding
these species (which are often difficult and time-consuming to identify). Methodology/Principal
Findings Adults are DNA barcoded by the Biodiversity Institute of Ontario, Guelph, Canada; and they
are identified by correlating the resulting COI barcode information with more traditional
information such as food plant, facies, genitalia, microlocation within ACG, caterpillar traits,
etc. This process has found about 303 morphologically defined species of eudamine and pyrgine
Hesperiidae breeding in ACG (about 25% of the ACG butterfly fauna) and another 44 units indicated by
distinct barcodes (n = 9,094), which may be additional species and therefore may represent as much
as a 13% increase. All but the members of one complex can be identified by their DNA barcodes.
Conclusions/Significance Addition of DNA barcoding to the methodology greatly improved the
inventory, both through faster (hence cheaper) accurate identification of the species that are
distinguishable without barcoding, as well as those that require it, and through the revelation of
species “hidden” within what have long been viewed as single species. Barcoding increased the
recognition of species-level specialization. It would be no more appropriate to ignore barcode data
in a species inventory than it would be to ignore adult genitalia variation or caterpillar ecology.



Enhanced Disease Susceptibility 1 and Salicylic Acid Act Redundantly to Regulate Resistance Gene-Mediated Signaling

Resistance (R) protein–associated pathways are well known to participate in defense against a
variety of microbial pathogens. Salicylic acid (SA) and its associated proteinaceous signaling
components, including enhanced disease susceptibility 1 (EDS1), non–race-specific disease resistance
1 (NDR1), phytoalexin deficient 4 (PAD4), senescence associated gene 101 (SAG101), and EDS5, have
been identified as components of resistance derived from many R proteins. Here, we show that EDS1
and SA fulfill redundant functions in defense signaling mediated by R proteins, which were thought
to function independent of EDS1 and/or SA. Simultaneous mutations in EDS1 and the SA–synthesizing
enzyme SID2 compromised hypersensitive response and/or resistance mediated by R proteins that
contain coiled coil domains at their N-terminal ends. Furthermore, the expression of R genes and the
associated defense signaling induced in response to a reduction in the level of oleic acid were also
suppressed by compromising SA biosynthesis in the eds1 mutant background. The functional redundancy
with SA was specific to EDS1. Results presented here redefine our understanding of the roles of EDS1
and SA in plant defense. Author Summary Salicylic acid and enhanced disease susceptibility 1 are
important components of resistance gene-mediated defense signaling against diverse pathogens in a
variety of plants. Present understanding of plant defense signaling pathways places salicylic acid
and enhanced disease susceptibility 1 downstream of resistant protein activation. In addition,
enhanced disease susceptibility 1 is primarily thought to function in the signaling initiated via
Toll-interleukin 1-receptor type of resistance proteins. Here, we show that salicylic acid and
enhanced disease susceptibility 1 serve redundant functions in defense signaling mediated by coiled-
coil-domain containing resistance proteins that were thought to function independent of enhanced
disease susceptibility 1. Furthermore, resistance signaling induced under low oleic acid conditions
also requires enhanced disease susceptibility 1 and salicylic acid in a redundant manner, but these
components are required upstream of resistance gene expression. Together, these results show that
the functional redundancy between salicylic acid and enhanced disease susceptibility 1 has precluded
their detection as required components of many resistance protein–signaling pathways.



Multi-loci Molecular Characterisation of Endophytic Fungi Isolated from Five Medicinal Plants of Meghalaya, India

The phylogenetic relationships of the most dominant and morphologically cryptic endophytic fungal
isolates from each of five selected medicinal plants, namely Potentilla fulgens, Osbeckia stellata,
Osbeckia chinensis, Camellia caduca, and Schima khasiana of the biodiversity rich state of
Meghalaya, were assessed with random amplification of polymorphic DNA and PCR-restriction fragment
length polymorphism profiles. Sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer 1, small subunit rRNA
and partial β-tubulin gene fragments was also conducted to determine the phylogenetic relationships
of these isolates with fungal sequences available in Genbank, NCBI. The identity of the fungal
isolates is suggested based on the molecular phylogenetic data.



Identification of Amazonian Trees with DNA Barcodes

Background Large-scale plant diversity inventories are critical to develop informed conservation
strategies. However, the workload required for classic taxonomic surveys remains high and is
particularly problematic for megadiverse tropical forests. Methodology/Principal Findings Based on a
comprehensive census of all trees in two hectares of a tropical forest in French Guiana, we examined
whether plant DNA barcoding could contribute to increasing the quality and the pace of tropical
plant biodiversity surveys. Of the eight plant DNA markers we tested (rbcLa, rpoC1, rpoB, matK,
ycf5, trnL, psbA-trnH, ITS), matK and ITS had a low rate of sequencing success. More critically,
none of the plastid markers achieved a rate of correct plant identification greater than 70%, either
alone or combined. The performance of all barcoding markers was noticeably low in few species-rich
clades, such as the Laureae, and the Sapotaceae. A field test of the approach enabled us to detect
130 molecular operational taxonomic units in a sample of 252 juvenile trees. Including molecular
markers increased the identification rate of juveniles from 72% (morphology alone) to 96%
(morphology and molecular) of the individuals assigned to a known tree taxon.
Conclusion/Significance We conclude that while DNA barcoding is an invaluable tool for detecting
errors in identifications and for identifying plants at juvenile stages, its limited ability to
identify collections will constrain the practical implementation of DNA-based tropical plant
biodiversity programs.



Genetic and morphological variation in sexual and asexual parasitoids of the genus Lysiphlebus – an apparent link between wing shape and reproductive mode

Background Morphological divergence often increases with phylogenetic distance, thus making
morphology taxonomically informative. However, transitions to asexual reproduction may complicate
this relationship because asexual lineages capture and freeze parts of the phenotypic variation of
the sexual populations from which they derive. Parasitoid wasps belonging to the genus Lysiphlebus
Foerster (Hymenoptera: Braconidae: Aphidiinae) are composed of over 20 species that exploit over a
hundred species of aphid hosts, including many important agricultural pests. Within Lysiphlebus, two
genetically and morphologically well-defined species groups are recognised: the “fabarum” and the
“testaceipes” groups. Yet within each group, sexual as well as asexual lineages occur, and in L.
fabarum different morphs of unknown origin and status have been recognised. In this study, we
selected a broad sample of specimens from the genus Lysiphlebus to explore the relationship between
genetic divergence, reproductive mode and morphological variation in wing size and shape (quantified
by geometric morphometrics). Results The analyses of mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences
revealed a clear separation between the “testaceipes” and “fabarum” groups of Lysiphlebus, as well
as three well-defined phylogenetic lineages within the “fabarum” species group and two lineages
within the “testaceipes” group. Divergence in wing shape was concordant with the deep split between
the “testaceipes” and “fabarum” species groups, but within groups no clear association between
genetic divergence and wing shape variation was observed. On the other hand, we found significant
and consistent differences in the shape of the wing between sexual and asexual lineages, even when
they were closely related. Conclusions Mapping wing shape data onto an independently derived
molecular phylogeny of Lysiphlebus revealed an association between genetic and morphological
divergence only for the deepest phylogenetic split. In more recently diverged taxa, much of the
variation in wing shape was explained by differences between sexual and asexual lineages, suggesting
a mechanistic link between wing shape and reproductive mode in these parasitoid wasps. Electronic
supplementary material The online version of this article (doi:10.1186/s12862-015-0293-5) contains
supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.



