The World Bacterial Biogeography and Biodiversity through Databases: A Case Study of NCBI Nucleotide Database and GBIF Database

Databases are an essential tool and resource within the field of bioinformatics. The primary aim of
this study was to generate an overview of global bacterial biodiversity and biogeography using
available data from the two largest public online databases, NCBI Nucleotide and GBIF. The secondary
aim was to highlight the contribution each geographic area has to each database. The basis for data
analysis of this study was the metadata provided by both databases, mainly, the taxonomy and the
geographical area origin of isolation of the microorganism (record). These were directly obtained
from GBIF through the online interface, while E-utilities and Python were used in combination with a
programmatic web service access to obtain data from the NCBI Nucleotide Database. Results indicate
that the American continent, and more specifically the USA, is the top contributor, while Africa and
Antarctica are less well represented. This highlights the imbalance of exploration within these
areas rather than any reduction in biodiversity. This study describes a novel approach to generating
global scale patterns of bacterial biodiversity and biogeography and indicates that the
Proteobacteria are the most abundant and widely distributed phylum within both databases.



The Effect of Urbanization on Ant Abundance and Diversity: A Temporal Examination of Factors Affecting Biodiversity

Numerous studies have examined the effect of urbanization on species richness and most studies
implicate urbanization as the major cause of biodiversity loss. However, no study has identified an
explicit connection between urbanization and biodiversity loss as the impact of urbanization is
typically inferred indirectly by comparing species diversity along urban-rural gradients at a single
time point. A different approach is to focus on the temporal rather than the spatial aspect and
perform “before and after” studies where species diversity is cataloged over time in the same sites.
The current study examined changes in ant abundance and diversity associated with the conversion of
natural habitats into urban habitats. Ant abundance and diversity were tracked in forested sites
that became urbanized through construction and were examined at 3 time points - before, during, and
after construction. On average, 4.3±1.2 unique species were detected in undisturbed plots prior to
construction. Ant diversity decreased to 0.7±0.8 species in plots undergoing construction and
1.5±1.1 species in plots 1 year after construction was completed. With regard to species richness,
urbanization resulted in the permanent loss of 17 of the 20 species initially present in the study
plots. Recovery was slow and only 3 species were present right after construction was completed and
4 species were present 1 year after construction was completed. The second objective examined ant
fauna recovery in developed residential lots based on time since construction, neighboring habitat
quality, pesticide inputs, and the presence of invasive ants. Ant diversity was positively
correlated with factors that promoted ecological recovery and negatively correlated with factors
that promoted ecological degradation. Taken together, these results address a critical gap in our
knowledge by characterizing the short- and long-term the effects of urbanization on the loss of ant
biodiversity.



Chlamydia caviae infection alters abundance but not composition of the guinea pig vaginal microbiota

In humans, the vaginal microbiota is thought to be the first line of defense again pathogens
including Chlamydia trachomatis. The guinea pig has been extensively used as a model to study
chlamydial infection because it shares anatomical and physiological similarities with humans, such
as a squamous vaginal epithelium as well as some of the long-term outcomes caused by chlamydial
infection. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the guinea pig-C. caviae model of genital infection
as a surrogate for studying the role of the vaginal microbiota in the early steps of C. trachomatis
infection in humans. We used culture-independent molecular methods to characterize the relative and
absolute abundance of bacterial phylotypes in the guinea pig vaginal microbiota in animals non-
infected, mock-infected or infected by C. caviae. We showed that the guinea pig and human vaginal
microbiotas are of different bacterial composition and abundance. Chlamydia caviae infection had a
profound effect on the absolute abundance of bacterial phylotypes but not on the composition of the
guinea pig vaginal microbiota. Our findings compromise the validity of the guinea pig-C. caviae
model to study the role of the vaginal microbiota during the early steps of sexually transmitted
infection. The vaginal microbiota of the guinea pig differs from that of humans and cannot prevent
chlamydial infections efficiently. The vaginal microbiota of the guinea pig differs from that of
humans and cannot prevent chlamydial infections efficiently.



Causes, consequences, and perspectives in the variations of intestinal density of colonization of multidrug-resistant enterobacteria

The intestinal microbiota is a complex environment that hosts 1013 to 1014 bacteria. Among these
bacteria stand multidrug-resistant enterobacteria (MDRE), which intestinal densities can
substantially vary, especially according to antibiotic exposure. The intestinal density of MDRE and
their relative abundance (i.e., the proportion between the density of MDRE and the density of total
enterobacteria) could play a major role in the infection process or patient-to-patient transmission.
This review discusses the recent advances in understanding (i) what causes variations in the density
or relative abundance of intestinal colonization, (ii) what are the clinical consequences of these
variations, and (iii) what are the perspectives for maintaining these markers at low levels.



The effects of weather on fungal abundance and richness among 25 communities in the Intermountain West

Background Because moisture and temperature influence the growth of fungi, characterizing weather
conditions favorable for fungi may be used to predict the abundance and richness of fungi in
habitats with different climate conditions. To estimate habitat favorability to fungi, we examined
the relationship of fungal abundance and species richness to various weather and environmental
parameters in the Intermountain West. We cultured fungi from air and leaf surfaces, and collected
continuous temperature and relative humidity measures over the growing season at 25 sites. Results
Fungal richness was positively correlated with fungal abundance (r = 0.75). Measures of moisture
availability, such as relative humidity and vapor pressure deficit, explained more of the variance
in fungal abundance and richness than did temperature. Climate measurements from nearby weather
stations were good predictors of fungal abundance and richness but not as good as weather
measurements obtained in the field. Weather variables that took into account the proportion of time
habitats experienced favorable or unfavorable relative humidity and temperatures were the best
predictors, explaining up to 56% of the variation in fungal abundance and 72% for fungal richness.
Conclusion Our results suggest that the abundance and richness of fungi in a habitat is limited by
the duration of unfavorable weather conditions. Because fungal pathogens likely have similar abiotic
requirements for growth as other fungi, characterizing weather conditions favorable for fungi also
may be used to predict the selective pressures imposed by pathogenic fungi on plants in different
habitats.



