Assessing biodiversity of a freshwater benthic macroinvertebrate community through non-destructive environmental barcoding of DNA from preservative ethanol

Background Characterizing biodiversity in a habitat or in targeted taxonomically or
socioeconomically important groups remains a challenge. Standard DNA-based biodiversity
identification tools such as DNA barcoding coupled with high-throughput Next-Generation Sequencing
(NGS) technologies are rapidly changing the landscape of biodiversity analysis by targeting various
habitats and a wide array of organisms. However, effective use of these technological advances
requires optimized protocols and benchmarking against traditional tools. Here we investigate the use
of commonly used preservative ethanol as a non-destructive and inexpensive source of DNA for NGS
biodiversity analysis of benthic macroinvertebrates. We used the preservative ethanol added to field
collected organisms (live sorted bulk benthic samples) as a source of community DNA for NGS
environmental barcoding. We directly compare this approach with a DNA barcode library generated
using Sanger sequencing of all individuals separated from abenthic sample as well as with NGS
environmental barcoding of DNA extracted from mixed/homogenized tissue specimens of the same benthic
sample. We also evaluate a multiplex PCR strategy, as compared to commonly used single amplicon
workflow, using three newly designed primer sets targeting a wide array of benthic macroinvertebrate
taxa. Results Our results indicate the effectiveness of ethanol-based DNA in providing sequence
information from 87% of taxa identified individually from mixture as compared to 89% in conventional
tissue extracted DNA. Missing taxa in both DNA sources were from species with the lowest abundance
(e.g. 1 individual) in the benthic mixture. Interestingly, we achieved 100% detection for taxa
represented with more than 1% individuals in the mixture in both sources of DNA. Our multiplex
amplification regime increased the detection as compared to any single primer set indicating the
usefulness of using multiple primer sets in initial amplification of target genes. Conclusions
Although NGS approaches have significantly increased the potential of using DNA information in
biodiversity analysis, robust methods are needed to provide reliable data and alleviate sample-
processing bottlenecks. Here we coupled non-destructive DNA access and a multiplex PCR approach in
NGS environmental barcoding for effective data generation from benthic live-sorted samples collected
in bulk and preserved in ethanol. Our study provides a possible solution to sampling and vouchering
challenges in using benthic samples through next-generation environmental barcoding and facilitates
wider utility of DNA information, especially species-specific DNA barcodes, in ecological and
environmental studies and real-world applications such as biomonitoring programs.



Characterising and Predicting Benthic Biodiversity for Conservation Planning in Deepwater Environments

Understanding patterns of biodiversity in deep sea systems is increasingly important because human
activities are extending further into these areas. However, obtaining data is difficult, limiting
the ability of science to inform management decisions. We have used three different methods of
quantifying biodiversity to describe patterns of biodiversity in an area that includes two marine
reserves in deep water off southern Australia. We used biological data collected during a recent
survey, combined with extensive physical data to model, predict and map three different attributes
of biodiversity: distributions of common species, beta diversity and rank abundance distributions
(RAD). The distribution of each of eight common species was unique, although all the species respond
to a depth-correlated physical gradient. Changes in composition (beta diversity) were large, even
between sites with very similar environmental conditions. Composition at any one site was highly
uncertain, and the suite of species changed dramatically both across and down slope. In contrast,
the distributions of the RAD components of biodiversity (community abundance, richness, and
evenness) were relatively smooth across the study area, suggesting that assemblage structure (i.e.
the distribution of abundances of species) is limited, irrespective of species composition.
Seamounts had similar biodiversity based on metrics of species presence, beta diversity, total
abundance, richness and evenness to the adjacent continental slope in the same depth ranges. These
analyses suggest that conservation objectives need to clearly identify which aspects of biodiversity
are valued, and employ an appropriate suite of methods to address these aspects, to ensure that
conservation goals are met.



Impact of biodiversity-climate futures on primary production and metabolism in a model benthic estuarine system

Background Understanding the effects of anthropogenically-driven changes in global temperature,
atmospheric carbon dioxide and biodiversity on the functionality of marine ecosystems is crucial for
predicting and managing the associated impacts. Coastal ecosystems are important sources of carbon
(primary production) to shelf waters and play a vital role in global nutrient cycling. These systems
are especially vulnerable to the effects of human activities and will be the first areas impacted by
rising sea levels. Within these coastal ecosystems, microalgal assemblages (microphytobenthos: MPB)
are vital for autochthonous carbon fixation. The level of in situ production by MPB mediates the net
carbon cycling of transitional ecosystems between net heterotrophic or autotrophic metabolism. In
this study, we examine the interactive effects of elevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations (370, 600,
and 1000 ppmv), temperature (6°C, 12°C, and 18°C) and invertebrate biodiversity on MPB biomass in
experimental systems. We assembled communities of three common grazing invertebrates (Hydrobia
ulvae, Corophium volutator and Hediste diversicolor) in monoculture and in all possible multispecies
combinations. This experimental design specifically addresses interactions between the selected
climate change variables and any ecological consequences caused by changes in species composition or
richness. Results The effects of elevated CO2 concentration, temperature and invertebrate diversity
were not additive, rather they interacted to determine MPB biomass, and overall this effect was
negative. Diversity effects were underpinned by strong species composition effects, illustrating the
importance of individual species identity. Conclusions Overall, our findings suggest that in natural
systems, the complex interactions between changing environmental conditions and any associated
changes in invertebrate assemblage structure are likely to reduce MPB biomass. Furthermore, these
effects would be sufficient to affect the net metabolic balance of the coastal ecosystem, with
important implications for system ecology and sustainable exploitation.



Community Biomass and Bottom up Multivariate Nutrient Complementarity Mediate the Effects of Bioturbator Diversity on Pelagic Production

Tests of the biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (BEF) relationship have focused little attention on the importance
of interactions between species diversity and other attributes of ecological communities such as community biomass.
Moreover, BEF research has been mainly derived from studies measuring a single ecosystem process that often represents
resource consumption within a given habitat. Focus on single processes has prevented us from exploring the
characteristics of ecosystem processes that can be critical in helping us to identify how novel pathways
throughout BEF mechanisms may operate. Here, we investigated whether and how the effects of biodiversity
mediated by non-trophic interactions among benthic bioturbator species vary according to community biomass and
ecosystem processes. We hypothesized that (1) bioturbator biomass and species richness interact to affect
the rates of benthic nutrient regeneration [dissolved inorganic nitrogen (DIN) and total dissolved phosphorus (TDP)]
and consequently bacterioplankton production (BP) and that (2) the complementarity effects of diversity will be stronger
on BP than on nutrient regeneration because the former represents a more integrative process that can be mediated
by multivariate nutrient complementarity. We show that the effects of bioturbator diversity on nutrient regeneration
increased BP via multivariate nutrient complementarity. Consistent with our prediction, the complementarity effects
were significantly stronger on BP than on DIN and TDP. The effects of the biomass-species richness interaction on
complementarity varied among the individual processes, but the aggregated measures of complementarity over all ecosystem
processes were significantly higher at the highest community biomass level. Our results suggest that the complementarity
effects of biodiversity can be stronger on more integrative ecosystem processes, which integrate subsidiary “simpler”
processes, via multivariate complementarity. In addition, reductions in community biomass may decrease the strength of
interspecific interactions so that the enhanced effects of biodiversity on ecosystem processes can disappear well before
species become extinct.



Deep-Sea Biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea: The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable

Deep-sea ecosystems represent the largest biome of the global biosphere, but
knowledge of their biodiversity is still scant. The Mediterranean basin has been
proposed as a hot spot of terrestrial and coastal marine biodiversity but has
been supposed to be impoverished of deep-sea species richness. We summarized all
available information on benthic biodiversity (Prokaryotes, Foraminifera,
Meiofauna, Macrofauna, and Megafauna) in different deep-sea ecosystems of the
Mediterranean Sea (200 to more than 4,000 m depth), including open slopes, deep
basins, canyons, cold seeps, seamounts, deep-water corals and deep-hypersaline
anoxic basins and analyzed overall longitudinal and bathymetric patterns. We
show that in contrast to what was expected from the sharp decrease in organic
carbon fluxes and reduced faunal abundance, the deep-sea biodiversity of both
the eastern and the western basins of the Mediterranean Sea is similarly high.
All of the biodiversity components, except Bacteria and Archaea, displayed a
decreasing pattern with increasing water depth, but to a different extent for
each component. Unlike patterns observed for faunal abundance, highest negative
values of the slopes of the biodiversity patterns were observed for Meiofauna,
followed by Macrofauna and Megafauna. Comparison of the biodiversity associated
with open slopes, deep basins, canyons, and deep-water corals showed that the
deep basins were the least diverse. Rarefaction curves allowed us to estimate
the expected number of species for each benthic component in different
bathymetric ranges. A large fraction of exclusive species was associated with
each specific habitat or ecosystem. Thus, each deep-sea ecosystem contributes
significantly to overall biodiversity. From theoretical extrapolations we
estimate that the overall deep-sea Mediterranean biodiversity (excluding
prokaryotes) reaches approximately 2805 species of which about 66% is                     still
undiscovered. Among the biotic components investigated (Prokaryotes                     excluded),
most of the unknown species are within the phylum Nematoda, followed                     by
Foraminifera, but an important fraction of macrofaunal and megafaunal species
also remains unknown. Data reported here provide new insights into the patterns
of biodiversity in the deep-sea Mediterranean and new clues for future
investigations aimed at identifying the factors controlling and threatening
deep-sea biodiversity.



