All Is Not Loss: Plant Biodiversity in the Anthropocene

Anthropogenic global changes in biodiversity are generally portrayed in terms of massive native
species losses or invasions caused by recent human disturbance. Yet these biodiversity changes and
others caused directly by human populations and their use of land tend to co-occur as long-term
biodiversity change processes in the Anthropocene. Here we explore contemporary anthropogenic global
patterns in vascular plant species richness at regional landscape scales by combining spatially
explicit models and estimates for native species loss together with gains in exotics caused by
species invasions and the introduction of agricultural domesticates and ornamental exotic plants.
The patterns thus derived confirm that while native losses are likely significant across at least
half of Earth's ice-free land, model predictions indicate that plant species richness has increased
overall in most regional landscapes, mostly because species invasions tend to exceed native losses.
While global observing systems and models that integrate anthropogenic species loss, introduction
and invasion at regional landscape scales remain at an early stage of development, integrating
predictions from existing models within a single assessment confirms their vast global extent and
significance while revealing novel patterns and their potential drivers. Effective global
stewardship of plant biodiversity in the Anthropocene will require integrated frameworks for
observing, modeling and forecasting the different forms of anthropogenic biodiversity change
processes at regional landscape scales, towards conserving biodiversity within the novel plant
communities created and sustained by human systems.



Biodiversity Effects on Plant Stoichiometry

In the course of the biodiversity-ecosystem functioning debate, the issue of multifunctionality of
species communities has recently become a major focus. Elemental stoichiometry is related to a
variety of processes reflecting multiple plant responses to the biotic and abiotic environment. It
can thus be expected that the diversity of a plant assemblage alters community level plant tissue
chemistry. We explored elemental stoichiometry in aboveground plant tissue (ratios of carbon,
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium) and its relationship to plant diversity in a 5-year study in a
large grassland biodiversity experiment (Jena Experiment). Species richness and functional group
richness affected community stoichiometry, especially by increasing C:P and N:P ratios. The primacy
of either species or functional group richness effects depended on the sequence of testing these
terms, indicating that both aspects of richness were congruent and complementary to expected strong
effects of legume presence and grass presence on plant chemical composition. Legumes and grasses had
antagonistic effects on C:N (−27.7% in the presence of legumes, +32.7% in the presence of grasses).
In addition to diversity effects on mean ratios, higher species richness consistently decreased the
variance of chemical composition for all elemental ratios. The diversity effects on plant
stoichiometry has several non-exclusive explanations: The reduction in variance can reflect a
statistical averaging effect of species with different chemical composition or a optimization of
nutrient uptake at high diversity, leading to converging ratios at high diversity. The shifts in
mean ratios potentially reflect higher allocation to stem tissue as plants grew taller at higher
richness. By showing a first link between plant diversity and stoichiometry in a multiyear
experiment, our results indicate that losing plant species from grassland ecosystems will lead to
less reliable chemical composition of forage for herbivorous consumers and belowground litter input.



Of the importance of a leaf: the ethnobotany of sarma in Turkey and the Balkans

Background Sarma - cooked leaves rolled around a filling made from rice and/or minced meat, possibly
vegetables and seasoning plants – represents one of the most widespread feasting dishes of the
Middle Eastern and South-Eastern European cuisines. Although cabbage and grape vine sarma is well-
known worldwide, the use of alternative plant leaves remains largely unexplored. The aim of this
research was to document all of the botanical taxa whose leaves are used for preparing sarma in the
folk cuisines of Turkey and the Balkans. Methods Field studies were conducted during broader
ethnobotanical surveys, as well as during ad-hoc investigations between the years 2011 and 2014 that
included diverse rural communities in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo, Albania,
Macedonia, Bulgaria, Romania, and Turkey. Primary ethnobotanical and folkloric literatures in each
country were also considered. Results Eighty-seven botanical taxa, mainly wild, belonging to 50
genera and 27 families, were found to represent the bio-cultural heritage of sarma in Turkey and the
Balkans. The greatest plant biodiversity in sarma was found in Turkey and, to less extent, in
Bulgaria and Romania. The most commonly used leaves for preparing sarma were those of cabbage (both
fresh and lacto-fermented), grape vine, beet, dock, sorrel, horseradish, lime tree, bean, and
spinach. In a few cases, the leaves of endemic species (Centaurea haradjianii, Rumex gracilescens,
and R. olympicus in Turkey) were recorded. Other uncommon sarma preparations were based on lightly
toxic taxa, such as potato leaves in NE Albania, leaves of Arum, Convolvulus, and Smilax species in
Turkey, of Phytolacca americana in Macedonia, and of Tussilago farfara in diverse countries.
Moreover, the use of leaves of the introduced species Reynoutria japonica in Romania, Colocasia
esculenta in Turkey, and Phytolacca americana in Macedonia shows the dynamic nature of folk
cuisines. Conclusion The rich ethnobotanical diversity of sarma confirms the urgent need to record
folk culinary plant knowledge. The results presented here can be implemented into initiatives aimed
at re-evaluating folk cuisines and niche food markets based on local neglected ingredients, and
possibly also to foster trajectories of the avant-garde cuisines inspired by ethnobotanical
knowledge.



Reading the Complex Skipper Butterfly Fauna of One Tropical Place

Background An intense, 30-year, ongoing biodiversity inventory of Lepidoptera, together with their
food plants and parasitoids, is centered on the rearing of wild-caught caterpillars in the 120,000
terrestrial hectares of dry, rain, and cloud forest of Area de Conservacion Guanacaste (ACG) in
northwestern Costa Rica. Since 2003, DNA barcoding of all species has aided their identification and
discovery. We summarize the process and results for a large set of the species of two speciose
subfamilies of ACG skipper butterflies (Hesperiidae) and emphasize the effectiveness of barcoding
these species (which are often difficult and time-consuming to identify). Methodology/Principal
Findings Adults are DNA barcoded by the Biodiversity Institute of Ontario, Guelph, Canada; and they
are identified by correlating the resulting COI barcode information with more traditional
information such as food plant, facies, genitalia, microlocation within ACG, caterpillar traits,
etc. This process has found about 303 morphologically defined species of eudamine and pyrgine
Hesperiidae breeding in ACG (about 25% of the ACG butterfly fauna) and another 44 units indicated by
distinct barcodes (n = 9,094), which may be additional species and therefore may represent as much
as a 13% increase. All but the members of one complex can be identified by their DNA barcodes.
Conclusions/Significance Addition of DNA barcoding to the methodology greatly improved the
inventory, both through faster (hence cheaper) accurate identification of the species that are
distinguishable without barcoding, as well as those that require it, and through the revelation of
species “hidden” within what have long been viewed as single species. Barcoding increased the
recognition of species-level specialization. It would be no more appropriate to ignore barcode data
in a species inventory than it would be to ignore adult genitalia variation or caterpillar ecology.



An Evaluation of Two Hands-On Lab Styles for Plant Biodiversity in Undergraduate Biology

Two formats of plant biodiversity labs were evaluated: a learning cycle format and an expository
format. Each had a prelab, a hands-on lab, and a write-to-learn postlab. Bloom's lower- and higher-
order cognition and attitudes were assessed. Results showed that the two styles had different costs
and benefits. Evidence indicates that a blended style may be best. We compared learning cycle and
expository formats for teaching about plant biodiversity in an inquiry-oriented university biology
lab class (n = 465). Both formats had preparatory lab activities, a hands-on lab, and a postlab with
reflection and argumentation. Learning was assessed with a lab report, a practical quiz in lab, and
a multiple-choice exam in the concurrent lecture. Attitudes toward biology and treatments were also
assessed. We used linear mixed-effect models to determine impacts of lab style on lower-order
cognition (LO) and higher-order cognition (HO) based on Bloom's taxonomy. Relative to the expository
treatment, the learning cycle treatment had a positive effect on HO and a negative effect on LO
included in lab reports; a positive effect on transfer of LO from the lab report to the quiz;
negative impacts on LO quiz performance and on attitudes toward the lab; and a higher degree of
perceived difficulty. The learning cycle treatment had no influence on transfer of HO from lab
report to quiz or exam; quiz performance on HO questions; exam performance on LO and HO questions;
and attitudes toward biology as a science. The importance of LO as a foundation for HO relative to
these lab styles is addressed.



