Where is the UK's pollinator biodiversity? The importance of urban areas for flower-visiting insects

Insect pollinators provide a crucial ecosystem service, but are under threat. Urban areas could be
important for pollinators, though their value relative to other habitats is poorly known. We
compared pollinator communities using quantified flower-visitation networks in 36 sites (each 1 km2)
in three landscapes: urban, farmland and nature reserves. Overall, flower-visitor abundance and
species richness did not differ significantly between the three landscape types. Bee abundance did
not differ between landscapes, but bee species richness was higher in urban areas than farmland.
Hoverfly abundance was higher in farmland and nature reserves than urban sites, but species richness
did not differ significantly. While urban pollinator assemblages were more homogeneous across space
than those in farmland or nature reserves, there was no significant difference in the numbers of
rarer species between the three landscapes. Network-level specialization was higher in farmland than
urban sites. Relative to other habitats, urban visitors foraged from a greater number of plant
species (higher generality) but also visited a lower proportion of available plant species (higher
specialization), both possibly driven by higher urban plant richness. Urban areas are growing, and
improving their value for pollinators should be part of any national strategy to conserve and
restore pollinators.



Diversification and coevolution in brood pollination mutualisms: Windows into the role of biotic interactions in generating biological diversity.

Brood pollination mutualisms-interactions in which specialized insects are both the pollinators (as
adults) and seed predators (as larvae) of their host plants-have been influential study systems for
coevolutionary biology. These mutualisms include those between figs and fig wasps, yuccas and yucca
moths, leafflowers and leafflower moths, globeflowers and globeflower flies, Silene plants and
Hadena and Perizoma moths, saxifrages and Greya moths, and senita cacti and senita moths. The high
reciprocal diversity and species-specificity of some of these mutualisms have been cited as evidence
that coevolution between plants and pollinators drives their mutual diversification. However, the
mechanisms by which these mutualisms diversify have received less attention. In this paper, we
review key hypotheses about how these mutualisms diversify and what role coevolution between plants
and pollinators may play in this process. We find that most species-rich brood pollination
mutualisms show significant phylogenetic congruence at high taxonomic scales, but there is limited
evidence for the processes of both cospeciation and duplication, and there are no unambiguous
examples known of strict-sense contemporaneous cospeciation. Allopatric speciation appears important
across multiple systems, particularly in the insects. Host-shifts appear to be common, and
widespread host-shifts by pollinators may displace other pollinator lineages. There is relatively
little evidence for a "coevolution through cospeciation" model or that coevolution promotes
speciation in these systems. Although we have made great progress in understanding the mechanisms by
which brood pollination mutualisms diversify, many opportunities remain to use these intriguing
symbioses to understand the role of biotic interactions in generating biological diversity.



Demonstration of pollinator-mediated competition between two native Impatiens species, Impatiens noli-tangere and I. textori (Balsaminaceae)

Plant–plant interspecific competition via pollinators occurs when the flowering seasons of two or
more plant species overlap and the pollinator fauna is shared. Negative sexual interactions between
species (reproductive interference) through improper heterospecific pollen transfer have recently
been reported between native and invasive species demonstrating pollination-driven competition. We
focused on two native Impatiens species (I. noli-tangere and I. textori) found in Japan and examined
whether pollinator-mediated plant competition occurs between them. We demonstrate that I. noli-
tangere and I. textori share the same pollination niche (i.e., flowering season, pollinator fauna,
and position of pollen on the pollinator's body). In addition, heterospecific pollen grains were
deposited on most stigmas of both I. noli-tangere and I. textori flowers that were situated within
2 m of flowers of the other species resulting in depressed fruit set. Further, by hand-pollination
experiments, we show that when as few as 10% of the pollen grains are heterospecific, fruit set is
decreased to less than half in both species. These results show that intensive pollinator-mediated
competition occurs between I. noli-tangere and I. textori. This study suggests that intensive
pollinator-mediated competition occurs in the wild even when interacting species are both native and
not invasive.



Pollination ecology and the possible impacts of environmental change in the Southwest Australian Biodiversity Hotspot.

The Southwest Australian Biodiversity Hotspot contains an exceptionally diverse flora on an ancient,
low-relief but edaphically diverse landscape. Since European colonization, the primary threat to the
flora has been habitat clearance, though climate change is an impending threat. Here, we review (i)
the ecology of nectarivores and biotic pollination systems in the region, (ii) the evidence that
trends in pollination strategies are a consequence of characteristics of the landscape, and (iii)
based on these discussions, provide predictions to be tested on the impacts of environmental change
on pollination systems. The flora of southwestern Australia has an exceptionally high level of
vertebrate pollination, providing the advantage of highly mobile, generalist pollinators.
Nectarivorous invertebrates are primarily generalist foragers, though an increasing number of
colletid bees are being recognized as being specialized at the level of plant family or more rarely
genus. While generalist pollination strategies dominate among insect-pollinated plants, there are
some cases of extreme specialization, most notably the multiple evolutions of sexual deception in
the Orchidaceae. Preliminary data suggest that bird pollination confers an advantage of greater
pollen movement and may represent a mechanism for minimizing inbreeding in naturally fragmented
populations. The effects of future environmental change are predicted to result from a combination
of the resilience of pollination guilds and changes in their foraging and dispersal behaviour.



Insect pollination and self-incompatibility in edible and/or medicinal crops in southwestern China, a global hotspot of biodiversity.

An increasing global demand for food, coupled with the widespread decline of pollinator diversity,
remains an international concern in agriculture and genetic conservation. In particular, there are
large gaps in the study of the pollination of economically important and traditionally grown species
in China. Many plant species grown in China are both edible and used medicinally. The country
retains extensive written records of agricultural and apicultural practices, facilitating
contemporary studies of some important taxa. Here, we focus on Yunnan in southwestern China, a mega-
biodiversity hotspot for medicinal/food plants. We used plant and insect taxa as model systems to
understand the patterns and consequences of pollinator deficit to crops. We identified several gaps
and limitations in research on the pollination ecology and breeding systems of domesticated taxa and
their wild relatives in Yunnan and asked the following questions: (1) What is known about
pollination systems of edible and medicinal plants in Yunnan? (2) What are the most important
pollinators of Codonopsis subglobosa (Campanulaceae)? (3) How important are native pollinator
species for maximizing yield in Chinese crops compared with the introduced Apis mellifera? We found
that some crops that require cross-pollination now depend exclusively on hand pollination. Three
domesticated crops are dependent primarily on the native but semidomesticated Apis cerana and the
introduced A. mellifera. Other species of wild pollinators often play important roles for certain
specialty crops (e.g., Vespa velutina pollinates Codonopsis subglobosa). We propose a more
systematic and comprehensive approach to applied research in the future.



