BioNames: linking taxonomy, texts, and trees

BioNames is a web database of taxonomic names for animals, linked to the primary literature and,
wherever possible, to phylogenetic trees. It aims to provide a taxonomic “dashboard” where at a
glance we can see a summary of the taxonomic and phylogenetic information we have for a given taxon
and hence provide a quick answer to the basic question “what is this taxon?” BioNames combines
classifications from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) and GenBank, images from
the Encyclopedia of Life (EOL), animal names from the Index of Organism Names (ION), and
bibliographic data from multiple sources including the Biodiversity Heritage Library (BHL) and
CrossRef. The user interface includes display of full text articles, interactive timelines of
taxonomic publications, and zoomable phylogenies. It is available at .



Body Size Is a Significant Predictor of Congruency in Species Richness Patterns: A Meta-Analysis of Aquatic Studies

Biodiversity losses over the next century are predicted to result in alterations of ecosystem
functions that are on par with other major drivers of global change. Given the seriousness of this
issue, there is a need to effectively monitor global biodiversity. Because performing biodiversity
censuses of all taxonomic groups is prohibitively costly, indicator groups have been studied to
estimate the biodiversity of different taxonomic groups. Quantifying cross-taxon congruence is a
method of evaluating the assumption that the diversity of one taxonomic group can be used to predict
the diversity of another. To improve the predictive ability of cross-taxon congruence in aquatic
ecosystems, we evaluated whether body size, measured as the ratio of average body length between
organismal groups, is a significant predictor of their cross-taxon biodiversity congruence. To test
this hypothesis, we searched the published literature and screened for studies that used species
richness correlations as their metric of cross-taxon congruence. We extracted 96 correlation
coefficients from 16 studies, which encompassed 784 inland water bodies. With these correlation
coefficients, we conducted a categorical meta-analysis, grouping data based on the body size ratio
of organisms. Our results showed that cross-taxon congruence is variable among sites and between
different groups (r values ranging between −0.53 to 0.88). In addition, our quantitative meta-
analysis demonstrated that organisms most similar in body size showed stronger species richness
correlations than organisms which differed increasingly in size (radj2 = 0.94, p = 0.02). We propose
that future studies applying biodiversity indicators in aquatic ecosystems consider functional
traits such as body size, so as to increase their success at predicting the biodiversity of
taxonomic groups where cost-effective conservation tools are needed.



Cryptic biodiversity in a changing world

DNA studies are revealing the extent of hidden, or cryptic, biodiversity. Two new studies challenge
paradigms about cryptic biodiversity and highlight the importance of adding a historical and
biogeographic dimension to biodiversity research.



Re-Structuring of Marine Communities Exposed to Environmental Change: A Global Study on the Interactive Effects of Species and Functional Richness

Species richness is the most commonly used but controversial biodiversity metric in studies on
aspects of community stability such as structural composition or productivity. The apparent
ambiguity of theoretical and experimental findings may in part be due to experimental shortcomings
and/or heterogeneity of scales and methods in earlier studies. This has led to an urgent call for
improved and more realistic experiments. In a series of experiments replicated at a global scale we
translocated several hundred marine hard bottom communities to new environments simulating a rapid
but moderate environmental change. Subsequently, we measured their rate of compositional change (re-
structuring) which in the great majority of cases represented a compositional convergence towards
local communities. Re-structuring is driven by mortality of community components (original species)
and establishment of new species in the changed environmental context. The rate of this re-
structuring was then related to various system properties. We show that availability of free
substratum relates negatively while taxon richness relates positively to structural persistence
(i.e., no or slow re-structuring). Thus, when faced with environmental change, taxon-rich
communities retain their original composition longer than taxon-poor communities. The effect of
taxon richness, however, interacts with another aspect of diversity, functional richness. Indeed,
taxon richness relates positively to persistence in functionally depauperate communities, but not in
functionally diverse communities. The interaction between taxonomic and functional diversity with
regard to the behaviour of communities exposed to environmental stress may help understand some of
the seemingly contrasting findings of past research.



Biogeography of the ecosystems of the healthy human body

Background Characterizing the biogeography of the microbiome of healthy humans is essential for
understanding microbial associated diseases. Previous studies mainly focused on a single body
habitat from a limited set of subjects. Here, we analyzed one of the largest microbiome datasets to
date and generated a biogeographical map that annotates the biodiversity, spatial relationships, and
temporal stability of 22 habitats from 279 healthy humans. Results We identified 929 genera from
more than 24 million 16S rRNA gene sequences of 22 habitats, and we provide a baseline of inter-
subject variation for healthy adults. The oral habitat has the most stable microbiota with the
highest alpha diversity, while the skin and vaginal microbiota are less stable and show lower alpha
diversity. The level of biodiversity in one habitat is independent of the biodiversity of other
habitats in the same individual. The abundances of a given genus at a body site in which it
dominates do not correlate with the abundances at body sites where it is not dominant. Additionally,
we observed the human microbiota exhibit both cosmopolitan and endemic features. Finally, comparing
datasets of different projects revealed a project-based clustering pattern, emphasizing the
significance of standardization of metagenomic studies. Conclusions The data presented here extend
the definition of the human microbiome by providing a more complete and accurate picture of human
microbiome biogeography, addressing questions best answered by a large dataset of subjects and body
sites that are deeply sampled by sequencing.



