Environmental Gap Analysis to Prioritize Conservation Efforts in Eastern Africa

Countries in eastern Africa have set aside significant proportions of their land for protection. But
are these areas representative of the diverse range of species and habitats found in the region? And
do conservation efforts include areas where the state of biodiversity is likely to deteriorate
without further interventions? Various studies have addressed these questions at global and
continental scales. However, meaningful conservation decisions are required at finer geographical
scales. To operate more effectively at the national level, finer scale baseline data on species and
on higher levels of biological organization such as the eco-regions are required, among other
factors. Here we adopted a recently developed high-resolution potential natural vegetation (PNV) map
for eastern Africa as a baseline to more effectively identify conservation priorities. We examined
how well different potential natural vegetations (PNVs) are represented in the protected area (PA)
network of eastern Africa and used a multivariate environmental similarity index to evaluate biases
in PA versus PNV coverage. We additionally overlaid data of anthropogenic factors that potentially
influence the natural vegetation to assess the level of threat to different PNVs. Our results
indicate substantial differences in the conservation status of PNVs. In addition, particular PNVs in
which biodiversity protection and ecological functions are at risk due to human influences are
revealed. The data and approach presented here provide a step forward in developing more transparent
and better informed translation from global priorities to regional or national implementation in
eastern Africa, and are valid for other geographic regions.



Beyond the Fragmentation Threshold Hypothesis: Regime Shifts in Biodiversity Across Fragmented Landscapes

Ecological systems are vulnerable to irreversible change when key system properties are pushed over
thresholds, resulting in the loss of resilience and the precipitation of a regime shift. Perhaps the
most important of such properties in human-modified landscapes is the total amount of remnant native
vegetation. In a seminal study Andrén proposed the existence of a fragmentation threshold in the
total amount of remnant vegetation, below which landscape-scale connectivity is eroded and local
species richness and abundance become dependent on patch size. Despite the fact that species patch-
area effects have been a mainstay of conservation science there has yet to be a robust empirical
evaluation of this hypothesis. Here we present and test a new conceptual model describing the
mechanisms and consequences of biodiversity change in fragmented landscapes, identifying the
fragmentation threshold as a first step in a positive feedback mechanism that has the capacity to
impair ecological resilience, and drive a regime shift in biodiversity. The model considers that
local extinction risk is defined by patch size, and immigration rates by landscape vegetation cover,
and that the recovery from local species losses depends upon the landscape species pool. Using a
unique dataset on the distribution of non-volant small mammals across replicate landscapes in the
Atlantic forest of Brazil, we found strong evidence for our model predictions - that patch-area
effects are evident only at intermediate levels of total forest cover, where landscape diversity is
still high and opportunities for enhancing biodiversity through local management are greatest.
Furthermore, high levels of forest loss can push native biota through an extinction filter, and
result in the abrupt, landscape-wide loss of forest-specialist taxa, ecological resilience and
management effectiveness. The proposed model links hitherto distinct theoretical approaches within a
single framework, providing a powerful tool for analysing the potential effectiveness of management
interventions.



Are We Filling the Data Void? An Assessment of the Amount and Extent of Plant Collection Records and Census Data Available for Tropical South America

Large-scale studies are needed to increase our understanding of how large-scale conservation
threats, such as climate change and deforestation, are impacting diverse tropical ecosystems. These
types of studies rely fundamentally on access to extensive and representative datasets (i.e., “big
data”). In this study, I asses the availability of plant species occurrence records through the
Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) and the distribution of networked vegetation census
plots in tropical South America. I analyze how the amount of available data has changed through time
and the consequent changes in taxonomic, spatial, habitat, and climatic representativeness. I show
that there are large and growing amounts of data available for tropical South America. Specifically,
there are almost 2,000,000 unique geo-referenced collection records representing more than 50,000
species of plants in tropical South America and over 1,500 census plots. However, there is still a
gaping “data void” such that many species and many habitats remain so poorly represented in either
of the databases as to be functionally invisible for most studies. It is important that we support
efforts to increase the availability of data, and the representativeness of these data, so that we
can better predict and mitigate the impacts of anthropogenic disturbances.



Predicting Tropical Dry Forest Successional Attributes from Space: Is the Key Hidden in Image Texture?

Biodiversity conservation and ecosystem-service provision will increasingly depend on the existence
of secondary vegetation. Our success in achieving these goals will be determined by our ability to
accurately estimate the structure and diversity of such communities at broad geographic scales. We
examined whether the texture (the spatial variation of the image elements) of very high-resolution
satellite imagery can be used for this purpose. In 14 fallows of different ages and one mature
forest stand in a seasonally dry tropical forest landscape, we estimated basal area, canopy cover,
stem density, species richness, Shannon index, Simpson index, and canopy height. The first six
attributes were also estimated for a subset comprising the tallest plants. We calculated 40 texture
variables based on the red and the near infrared bands, and EVI and NDVI, and selected the best-fit
linear models describing each vegetation attribute based on them. Basal area (R2 = 0.93), vegetation
height and cover (0.89), species richness (0.87), and stand age (0.85) were the best-described
attributes by two-variable models. Cross validation showed that these models had a high predictive
power, and most estimated vegetation attributes were highly accurate. The success of this simple
method (a single image was used and the models were linear and included very few variables) rests on
the principle that image texture reflects the internal heterogeneity of successional vegetation at
the proper scale. The vegetation attributes best predicted by texture are relevant in the face of
two of the gravest threats to biosphere integrity: climate change and biodiversity loss. By
providing reliable basal area and fallow-age estimates, image-texture analysis allows for the
assessment of carbon sequestration and diversity loss rates. New and exciting research avenues open
by simplifying the analysis of the extent and complexity of successional vegetation through the
spatial variation of its spectral information.



Assessments of Drought Impacts on Vegetation in China with the Optimal Time Scales of the Climatic Drought Index

Drought is expected to increase in frequency and severity due to global warming, and its impacts on
vegetation are typically extensively evaluated with climatic drought indices, such as multi-scalar
Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI). We analyzed the covariation between the
SPEIs of various time scales and the anomalies of the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI),
from which the vegetation type-related optimal time scales were retrieved. The results indicated
that the optimal time scales of needle-leaved forest, broadleaf forest and shrubland were between 10
and 12 months, which were considerably longer than the grassland, meadow and cultivated vegetation
ones (2 to 4 months). When the optimal vegetation type-related time scales were used, the SPEI could
better reflect the vegetation’s responses to water conditions, with the correlation coefficients
between SPEIs and NDVI anomalies increased by 5.88% to 28.4%. We investigated the spatio-temporal
characteristics of drought and quantified the different responses of vegetation growth to drought
during the growing season (April–October). The results revealed that the frequency of drought has
increased in the 21st century with the drying trend occurring in most of China. These results are
useful for ecological assessments and adapting management steps to mitigate the impact of drought on
vegetation. They are helpful to employ water resources more efficiently and reduce potential damage
to human health caused by water shortages.